Ancient Greek architecture
Top: The Parthenon  (460–406 BC); Centre:
The Erechtheion  (421–406 BC); Bottom:
Ancient Greek architecture
Ancient Greek architecture  came  from  the  Greeks , or H ellen es, whose culture
flourished  on  the  Greek  mainland,  the  Peloponnese , t h e Aegean  Islands , a n d i n
colonies in Anatolia  and Italy for a period from about 900 BC until the 1st century AD,
with the earliest remaining architectural works dating from around 600 BC.
[ 1 ]
Ancient Greek architecture is best known for its temples , many of which are found
throughout the region, with the Parthenon  regarded, now as in ancient times, as the
prime  example.
[ 2 ]
 Most  remains  are  very  incomplete  ruins,  but  a  number  survive
substantially  intact,  mostly  outside  modern  Greece.  The  second  important  type  of
building that survives all over the Hellenic world is the open-air theatre , w i t h t h e
earliest dating from around 525–480 BC. Other architectural forms  that are still in
evidence  are  the  processional  gateway  ( propylon ),  the  public  square  ( agora )
surrounded by storied colonnade ( stoa ), the town council building ( bouleuterion ), the
public monument, the monumental tomb ( mausoleum ) and the stadium .
Ancient Greek architecture is distinguished by its highly formalised characteristics,
both of structure and decoration. This is particularly so in the case of temples where
each  building  appears  to  have  been  conceived  as  a  sculptural  entity  within  the
landscape, very often raised on high ground so that the elegance of its proportions and
the effects of light on its surfaces might be viewed from all angles.
[ 3 ]
Nikolaus Pevsner
refers to "the plastic shape of the [Greek] temple [...] placed before us with a physical
presence more intense, more alive than that of any later building".
[ 4 ]
The  formal  vocabulary  of  ancient  Greek  architecture,  in  particular  the  division  of
architectural style into three defined orders: the Doric Order , the Ionic Order  and the
Corinthian  Order ,  was  to  have  a  profound  effect  on  Western  architecture  o f l a t e r
periods. The architecture of ancient Rome  grew out of that of Greece and maintained
its influence in Italy unbroken until the present day. From the Renaissance , revivals of
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 1 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
Illustration of Doric  (left three), Ionic  (middle
three) and Corinthian  (right two) columns
Additional media
Years
active
c.  900 BC–1st century AD
Location The Greek  mainland, the
Peloponnese , the Aegean
Islands , Anatolia , and in colonies
Inﬂuenced
Ancient Roman
Greek Revival
Neoclassical
Classicism  have kept alive not only the precise forms and ordered details of Greek
architecture,  but  also  its  concept  of  architectural  beauty  based  on  balance  and
proportion.  The  successive  styles  of  Neoclassical  architecture  a n d Greek  Revival
architecture  followed and adapted ancient Greek styles closely.
The mainland and islands of Greece are very rocky, with deeply indented coastline, and
rugged  mountain  ranges  with  few  substantial  forests.  The  most  freely  available
building material is stone. Limestone was readily available and easily worked.
[ 5 ]
 There
is an abundance of high quality white marble  both on the mainland and islands, particularly Paros  and Naxos . This finely grained
material  was  a  major  contributing  factor  to  precision  of  detail,  both  architectural  and  sculptural,  that  adorned  ancient  Greek
architecture.
[ 6 ]
 Deposits of high-quality potter's clay were found throughout Greece and the Islands, with major deposits near
Athens. It was used not only for pottery vessels but also roof tiles and architectural decoration.
[ 7 ]
The climate of Greece is maritime, with both the coldness of winter and the heat of summer tempered by sea breezes. This led to a
lifestyle where many activities took place outdoors. Hence temples were placed on hilltops, their exteriors designed as a visual focus
of gatherings and processions, while theatres were often an enhancement of a naturally occurring sloping site where people could sit,
rather than a containing structure. Colonnades encircling buildings, or surrounding courtyards provided shelter from the sun and
from sudden winter storms.
[ 6 ]
The light of Greece may be another important factor in the development of the particular character of ancient Greek architecture. The
light is often extremely bright, with both the sky and the sea vividly blue. The clear light and sharp shadows give a precision to the
details of the landscape, pale rocky outcrops and seashore. This clarity is alternated with periods of haze that varies in colour to the
light on it. In this characteristic environment, the ancient Greek architects constructed buildings that were marked by the precision
of detail.
[ 6 ]
 The gleaming marble surfaces were smooth, curved, fluted, or ornately sculpted to reflect the sun, cast graded shadows
and change in colour with the ever-changing light of day.
Influences
Geography
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 2 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
The rugged indented coastline at
Rhamnous , Attica
The Theatre and Temple of
Apollo in mountainous country at
Delphi
The Acropolis, Athens , is high
above the city on a natural
prominence.
The Islands of the Aegean from
Cape Sounion
Historians divide ancient Greek civilization into two eras, the Hellenic period  (from around 900 BC to the death of Alexander the
Great  in  323  BC),  and  the  Hellenistic  period  (323  BC  –  30  AD).
[ 8 ]
 During  the  earlier  Hellenic  period,  substantial  works  of
architecture began to appear around 600 BC. During the later (Hellenistic) period, Greek culture spread as a result of Alexander's
conquest of other lands, and later as a result of the rise of the Roman Empire, which adopted much of Greek culture.
[ 1 ] [ 9 ]
Before the Hellenic era, two major cultures had dominated the region: the Minoan  ( c.   2800  – c.   1100 BC ), and the Mycenaean  (c.
1500–1100 BC). Minoan is the name given by modern historians to the culture of the people of ancient Crete , known for its elaborate
and richly decorated Minoan palaces , and for its pottery, the most famous of which painted with floral and motifs of sea life . The
Mycenaean culture, which flourished on the Peloponnesus , was different in character. Its people built citadels, fortifications and
tombs, and decorated their pottery with bands of marching soldiers rather than octopus and seaweed. Both these civilizations came
to an end around 1100 BC, that of Crete possibly because of volcanic devastation, and that of Mycenae because of an invasion by the
Dorian people who lived on the Greek mainland.
[ 10 ]
 Following these events, there was a period from which only a village level of
culture seems to have existed. This period is thus often referred to as the Greek Dark Age .
The art of the Hellenic era is generally subdivided into four periods: the Protogeometric (1100–900 BC), the Geometric (900–700
BC), the Archaic (700–500 BC) and the Classical (500–323 BC)
[ 11 ]
 with sculpture being further divided into Severe Classical, High
Classical and Late Classical.
[ 1 ]
 The first signs of the particular artistic character that defines ancient Greek architecture are to be seen
in the pottery of the Dorian Greeks from the 10th century BC. Already at this period it is created with a sense of proportion,
History
Art
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 3 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
Black ﬁgure Amphora ,
Atalante painter (500–490
BC), shows proportion and
style that are hallmarks of
ancient Greek art
The Kritios Boy ,
(c. 480 BC),
typiﬁes the
tradition of free-
standing ﬁgures
symmetry and balance not apparent in similar pottery from Crete and Mycenae. The
decoration is precisely geometric, and ordered neatly into zones on defined areas of each
vessel. These qualities were to manifest themselves not only through a millennium of
Greek pottery making, but also in the architecture that was to emerge in the 6th century.
[ 12 ]
 The major development that occurred was in the growing use of the human figure as
the  major  decorative  motif,  and  the  increasing  surety  with  which  humanity,  its
mythology, activities and passions were depicted.
[ 1 ]
The development in the depiction of the human form in pottery was accompanied by a
similar development in sculpture. The tiny stylised bronzes of the Geometric period gave
way to life-sized highly formalised monolithic representation in the Archaic period. The
Classical period was marked by a rapid development towards idealised but increasingly
lifelike depictions of gods in human form.
[ 13 ]
 This development had a direct effect on the
sculptural decoration of temples, as many of the greatest extant works of ancient Greek
sculpture once adorned temples,
[ 14 ]
 and many of the largest recorded statues of the age,
such as the lost chryselephantine  statues of Zeus at the Temple of Zeus at Olympia and
Athena at the Parthenon, Athens, both over 40 feet high, were once housed in them.
[ 15 ]
The religion of ancient Greece  was a form of nature worship that grew out of the beliefs of earlier cultures. However, unlike earlier
cultures, man was no longer perceived as being threatened by nature, but as its sublime product.
[ 9 ]
 The natural elements were
personified as gods of the complete human form, and very human behaviour.
[ 6 ]
The home of the gods was thought to be Olympus , the highest mountain in Greece. The most important deities were: Zeus , the
supreme god and ruler of the sky; Hera , his wife and goddess of marriage; Athena , goddess of wisdom; Poseidon , the god of the sea;
Demeter , goddess of the harvest; Apollo , the god of the sun, law, healing, plague, reason, music and poetry; Artemis , goddess of
chastity, the hunt and the wilderness; Aphrodite , goddess of love; Ares , God of war; Hermes , the god of commerce and travellers,
Hephaestus , the god of fire and metalwork; and Dionysus , the god of wine and fruit-bearing plants.
[ 6 ]
 Worship, like many other
activities, was done in the community, in the open. However, by 600 BC, the gods were often represented by large statues and it was
necessary to provide a building in which each of these could be housed. This led to the development of temples.
[ 16 ]
The ancient Greeks perceived order in the universe, and in turn, applied order and reason to their creations. Their humanist
philosophy put mankind at the centre of things and promoted well-ordered societies and the development of democracy.
[ 9 ]
 At the
Religion and philosophy
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 4 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
Above: Modern model of ancient Olympia
with the Temple of Zeus at the centre
Right: Recreation of the colossal statue
of Athena, once housed in the
Parthenon, with sculptor Alan LeQuire
same time, the respect for human intellect demanded a reason,
and  promoted  a  passion  for  enquiry,  logic,  challenge,  and
problem-solving. The architecture of the ancient Greeks, and in
particular,  temple  architecture,  responds  to  these  challenges
with a passion for beauty, and for order and symmetry which is
the product of a continual search for perfection, rather than a
simple application of a set of working rules.
There is a clear division between the architecture  of the preceding Mycenaean  and Minoan  cultures and that of the ancient Greeks,
with much of the techniques and an understanding of their style being lost when these civilisations fell.
[ 5 ]
Mycenaean architecture  is marked by massive fortifications, typically surrounding a citadel with a royal palace, much smaller than
the rambling Minoan "palaces", and relatively few other buildings. The megaron , a rectangular hall with a hearth in the centre, was
the largest room in the palaces, and also larger houses. Sun-dried brick above rubble bases were the usual materials, with wooden
columns and roof-beams. Rows of ashlar  stone orthostats  lined the base of walls in some prominent locations.
[ 17 ]
The Minoan architecture of Crete was of the trabeated form like that of ancient Greece. It employed wooden columns with capitals,
but the wooden columns were of a very different form to Doric columns, being narrow at the base and splaying upward.
[ 10 ]
 The
earliest forms of columns in Greece seem to have developed independently. As with Minoan architecture, ancient Greek domestic
architecture centred on open spaces or courtyards surrounded by colonnades . This form was adapted to the construction of hypostyle
halls within the larger temples. The evolution that occurred in architecture was towards the public building, first and foremost the
Architectural character
Early development
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 5 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
temple, rather than towards grand domestic architecture such as had evolved in Crete,
[ 3 ]
 if  the  Cretan  "palaces"  were  indeed
domestic, which remains uncertain.
Some  Mycenaean  tombs  are  marked  by  circular  structures  and  tapered  domes  with  flat-bedded,  cantilevered  courses.
[ 10 ]
 T h i s
architectural form  did not carry over into the architecture of ancient Greece, but reappeared about 400 BC in the interior of large
monumental tombs such as the Lion Tomb at Knidos  (c. 350 BC).
The Greek word for the family or household, oikos , is also the name for the house. Houses followed several different types. It is
probable that many of the earliest houses were simple structures of two rooms, with an open porch or pronaos , above which rose a
low pitched gable or pediment .
[ 8 ]
 This form is thought to have contributed to temple architecture.
Plan of the House of Colline, 2nd
century BC
The House of Masks, Delos, 3rd
century BC
The House of Masks
 The mosaic  ﬂoor of a house at
Delos
The construction of many houses employed walls of sun-dried clay bricks or wooden framework filled with fibrous material such as
straw or seaweed covered with clay or plaster, on a base of stone which protected the more vulnerable elements from damp.
[ 5 ]
 The
roofs were probably of thatch with eaves which overhung the permeable walls. Many larger houses, such as those at Delos, were built
of stone  and plastered. The roofing  material for the substantial  house was  tile. Houses  of the  wealthy had  mosaic floors  and
demonstrated the Classical style.
Many houses centred on a wide passage or "pasta" which ran the length of the house and opened at one side onto a small courtyard
which admitted light and air. Larger houses had a fully developed peristyle  (courtyard) at the centre, with the rooms arranged around
it. Some houses had an upper floor which appears to have been reserved for the use of the women of the family.
[ 18 ]
Types of buildings
Domestic buildings
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 6 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
City houses were built with adjoining walls and were divided into small blocks by narrow streets. Shops were sometimes located in
the rooms towards the street. City houses were inward-facing, with major openings looking onto the central courtyard, rather than
the street.
[ 8 ]
The rectangular temple  is the most common and best-known form of Greek public architecture. This rectilinear structure borrows
from the Late Helladic, Mycenaean megaron , which contained a central throne room, vestibule, and porch.
[ 19 ]
 The temple did not
serve the same function as a modern church, since the altar stood under the open sky in the temenos  or sacred precinct, often directly
before the temple. Temples served as the location of a cult image  and as a storage place or strong room for the treasury associated
with the cult of the god in question, and as a place for devotees of the god to leave their votive offerings , such as statues, helmets and
weapons. Some Greek temples appear to have been oriented astronomically.
[ 20 ]
 The temple was generally part of a religious precinct
known as the acropolis . According to Aristotle , "the site should be a spot seen far and wide, which gives good elevation to virtue and
towers over the neighbourhood".
[ 3 ]
 Small circular temples, tholoi  were also constructed, as well as small temple-like buildings that
served as treasuries for specific groups of donors.
[ 21 ]
Porta Rosa, a street (3rd century BC)
Velia , Italy
The reconstructed Stoa of
Attalos , the Agora, Athens
The Bouleuterion, at Priene
 The Stadium at Epidauros
During the late 5th and 4th centuries BC, town planning became an important consideration of Greek builders, with towns such as
Paestum  and Priene  being laid out with a regular grid of paved streets and an agora  or central market place surrounded by a
colonnade or stoa . The completely restored Stoa of Attalos  can be seen in Athens . Towns were also equipped with a public fountain
where water could be collected for household use. The development of regular town plans is associated with Hippodamus of Miletus ,
a pupil of Pythagoras .
[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ]
Public buildings became "dignified and gracious structures", and were sited so that they related to each other architecturally.
[ 23 ]
 The
propylon  or porch, formed the entrance to temple sanctuaries and other significant sites with the best-surviving example being the
Public buildings
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 7 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
Propylaea on the Acropolis of Athens . The bouleuterion  was a large public building with a hypostyle  hall that served as a court house
and as a meeting place for the town council ( boule ). Remnants of bouleuterion survive at Athens, Olympia and Miletus, the latter
having held up to 1,200 people.
[ 25 ]
Every Greek town had an open-air theatre . These were used for both public meetings as well as dramatic performances. The theatre
was usually set in a hillside outside the town, and had rows of tiered seating set in a semicircle around the central performance area,
the orchestra . Behind the orchestra was a low building called the skênê , which served as a store-room, a dressing room, and also as a
backdrop to the action taking place in the orchestra. A number of Greek theatres  survive almost intact, the best known being at
Epidaurus  by the architect Polykleitos the Younger .
[ 22 ]
Greek towns of substantial size also had a palaestra  or a gymnasium , the social centre for male citizens which included spectator
areas, baths, toilets and club rooms.
[ 25 ]
 Other buildings associated with sports include the hippodrome  for horse racing, of which
only remnants have survived, and the stadium  for foot racing, 600 feet in length, of which examples exist at Olympia, Delphi,
Epidaurus and Ephesus, while the Panathinaiko Stadium  in Athens, which seats 45,000 people, was restored in the 19th century and
was used in the 1896, 1906 and 2004 Olympic Games .
[ 25 ] [ 26 ]
The Palaestra  at Olympia, used for
boxing and wrestling
The Theatre of Dionysus , Athens
 Pebble mosaic ﬂoor of a house
at Olynthos, depicting
Bellerophon
The altar of Hiero II  at Syracuse
The architecture of ancient Greece is of a trabeated or " post and lintel " form, i.e. it is composed of upright beams (posts) supporting
horizontal beams (lintels). Although the existent buildings of the era are constructed in stone, it is clear that the origin of the style lies
Structure
Post and lintel
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 8 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
Parts of an Ancient Greek temple of the Doric
Order:
1. Tympanum , 2. Acroterium , 3. Sima  4. Cornice
5. Mutules  7. Frieze  8. Triglyph  9. Metope
in simple wooden structures, with vertical posts supporting beams which carried a
ridged roof. The posts and beams divided the walls into regular compartments which
could be left as openings, or filled with sun dried bricks, lathes or straw and covered
with clay daub or plaster. Alternately, the spaces might be filled with rubble. It is
likely that many early houses and temples were constructed with an open porch or
"pronaos" above which rose a low pitched gable or pediment.
[ 8 ]
The earliest temples, built to enshrine statues of deities, were probably of wooden
construction, later replaced by the more durable stone temples many of which are still
in evidence today. The signs of the original timber nature of the architecture were
maintained in the stone buildings.
[ 27 ]
A  few  of  these  temples  are  very  large,  with  several,  such  as  the  Temple  of  Zeus
Olympus and the Olympians at Athens being well over 300 feet in length, but most
were  less  than  half  this  size.  It  appears  that  some  of  the  large  temples  began  as
wooden constructions in which the columns were replaced piecemeal as stone became
available. This, at least was the interpretation of the historian Pausanias  looking at the
Temple of Hera at Olympia in the 2nd century AD.
[ 3 ]
The stone columns are made of a series of solid stone cylinders or "drums" that rest on
each  other  without  mortar,  but  were  sometimes  centred  with  a  bronze  pin.  The
columns are wider at the base than at the top, tapering with an outward curve known
as entasis . Each column has a capital  of two parts, the upper, on which rests the
lintels, being square and called the abacus . The part of the capital that rises from the
column itself is called the echinus. It differs according to the order, being plain in the
Doric order, fluted in the Ionic and foliate in the Corinthian. Doric and usually Ionic
capitals are cut with vertical grooves known as fluting . This fluting or grooving of the
columns is a retention of an element of the original wooden architecture.
[ 27 ]
The  columns  of  a  temple  support  a  structure  that  rises  in  two  main  stages,  the
entablature  and the pediment .
The entablature is the major horizontal structural element supporting the roof and
Entablature and pediment
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 9 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
5. Mutules  7. Frieze  8. Triglyph  9. Metope
10. Regula  11. Gutta  12. Taenia  13. Architrave  14.
Capital  15. Abacus  16. Echinus  17. Column  18.
Fluting  19. Stylobate
encircling the entire building. It is composed of three parts. Resting on the columns is the architrave  made of a series of stone
"lintels" that spanned the space between the columns, and meet each other at a joint directly above the centre of each column.
Above the architrave is a second horizontal stage called the frieze . The frieze is one of the major decorative elements of the building
and carries a sculptured relief. In the case of Ionic and Corinthian architecture, the relief decoration runs in a continuous band, but
in the Doric order, it is divided into sections called metopes , which fill the spaces between vertical rectangular blocks called triglyphs .
The triglyphs are vertically grooved like the Doric columns, and retain the form of the wooden beams that would once have supported
the roof.
The upper band of the entablature is called the cornice , which is generally ornately decorated on its lower edge. The cornice retains
the shape of the beams that would once have supported the wooden roof at each end of the building. At the front and rear of each
temple, the entablature supports a triangular structure called the pediment. The tympanum  is the triangular space framed by the
cornices and the location of the most significant sculptural decoration on the exterior of the building.
Every temple rested on a masonry base called the crepidoma , generally of three steps, of which the upper one which carried the
columns was the stylobate . Masonry walls were employed for temples from about 600 BC onwards. Masonry of all types was used for
ancient Greek buildings, including rubble, but the finest ashlar  masonry was usually employed for temple walls, in regular courses
and large sizes to minimise the joints.
[ 8 ]
 The blocks were rough hewn and hauled from quarries to be cut and bedded very precisely,
with mortar hardly ever being used. Blocks, particularly those of columns and parts of the building bearing loads were sometimes
fixed in place or reinforced with iron clamps, dowels and rods of wood, bronze or iron fixed in lead to minimise corrosion.
[ 5 ]
Door and window openings were spanned with a lintel, which in a stone building limited the possible width of the opening. The
distance between columns was similarly affected by the nature of the lintel, columns on the exterior of buildings and carrying stone
lintels being closer together than those on the interior, which carried wooden lintels.
[ 28 ] [ 29 ]
 Door and window openings narrowed
towards the top.
[ 29 ]
 Temples were constructed without windows, the light to the naos entering through the door. It has been
suggested that some temples were lit from openings in the roof.
[ 28 ]
 A door of the Ionic Order at the Erechtheion (17 feet high and 7.5
feet wide at the top) retains many of its features intact, including mouldings, and an entablature supported on console brackets. (See
Architectural Decoration, below)
[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ]
Masonry
Openings
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 10 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
Structure, masonry, openings and roof of Greek temples
The Parthenon , shows the common
structural features of Ancient Greek
architecture: crepidoma , columns,
entablature, pediment.
Temple of Hephaestos , ﬂuted Doric
columns with abacuses supporting
double beams of the architrave
Erechtheion :
masonry, door,
stone lintels,
coffered ceiling
panels
At the Temple of Aphaia , the
hypostyle columns rise in two
tiers, to a height greater than the
walls, to support a roof without
struts.
The widest span of a temple roof was across the cella , or inner chamber. In a large building, this space contains columns to support
the roof, the architectural form  being known as hypostyle . It appears that, although the architecture of ancient Greece was initially of
wooden construction, the early builders did not have the concept of the diagonal truss as a stabilising member. This is evidenced by
the nature of temple construction in the 6th century BC, where the rows of columns supporting the roof of the cella rise higher than
the outer walls, unnecessary if roof trusses are employed as an integral part of the wooden roof. The indication is that initially all the
rafters were supported directly by the entablature, walls and hypostyle, rather than on a trussed wooden frame, which came into use
in Greek architecture only in the 3rd century BC.
[ 8 ]
Ancient Greek buildings of timber, clay and plaster construction were probably roofed with thatch. With the rise of stone architecture
came the appearance of fired ceramic roof tiles . These early roof tiles showed an S-shape, with the pan and cover tile forming one
piece. They were much larger than modern roof tiles, being up to 90 cm (35.43 in) long, 70 cm (27.56 in) wide, 3–4 cm (1.18–1.57  in )
thick and weighing around 30 kg (66 lb) apiece.
[ 32 ]
 Only stone walls, which were replacing the earlier mudbrick  and wood walls,
were strong enough to support the weight of a tiled roof.
[ 33 ]
The earliest finds of roof tiles of the Archaic period in Greece  are documented from a very restricted area around Corinth , where fired
tiles began to replace thatched  roofs at the temples of Apollo  and Poseidon  between 700 and 650 BC.
[ 34 ]
 Spreading rapidly, roof tiles
were within fifty years in evidence for a large number of sites around the Eastern Mediterranean , including Mainland Greece ,
Western Asia Minor , Southern and Central Italy .
[ 34 ]
 Being  more  expensive  and  labour-intensive  to  produce  than thatch,  their
Roof
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 11 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
introduction has been explained by the fact that their fireproof quality would have given desired protection to the costly temples.
[ 34 ]
As a side-effect, it has been assumed that the new stone and tile construction also ushered in the end of overhanging eaves in Greek
architecture, as they made the need for an extended roof as rain protection for the mudbrick walls obsolete.
[ 33 ]
Vaults  and arches  were not generally used, but begin to appear in tombs (in a "beehive" or cantilevered form such as used in
Mycenaea) and occasionally, as an external feature, exedrae  of voussoired  construction from the 5th century BC. The dome  and vault
never became significant structural features, as they were to become in ancient Roman architecture .
[ 8 ]
Most ancient Greek  temples were rectangular, and were approximately twice as long as they were wide, with some notable exceptions
such as the enormous Temple of Olympian Zeus, Athens , with a length of nearly 2
1
⁄
2
 times its width. A number of surviving temple-
like structures are circular, and are referred to as tholos .
[ 35 ]
 The smallest temples are less than 25 metres (approx. 75 feet) in length,
or in the case of the circular tholos , in diameter. The great majority of temples are between 30 and 60 metres (approx. 100–200 feet)
in length. A small group of Doric temples, including the Parthenon , are between 60 and 80 metres (approx. 200–260 feet) in length.
The largest temples, mainly Ionic and Corinthian, but including the Doric Temple of the Olympian Zeus, Agrigento , were between 90
and 120 metres (approx. 300–390 feet) in length.
The temple rises from a stepped base or stylobate , which elevates the structure above the ground on which it stands. Early examples,
such as the Temple of Zeus at Olympus, have two steps, but the majority, like the Parthenon, have three, with the exceptional
example of the Temple of Apollo at Didyma having six.
[ 36 ]
 The core of the building is a masonry-built "naos" within which is a cella, a
windowless room originally housing the statue of the god. The cella generally has a porch or "pronaos" before it, and perhaps a
second chamber or "antenaos" serving as a treasury or repository for trophies and gifts. The chambers were lit by a single large
doorway, fitted with a wrought iron grill. Some rooms appear to have been illuminated by skylights.
[ 36 ]
On the stylobate, often completely surrounding the naos, stand rows of columns. Each temple is defined as being of a particular type,
with two terms: one describing the number of columns across the entrance front, and the other defining their distribution.
[ 36 ]
Examples:
▪ Distyle in antis  describes a small temple with two columns at the front, which are set between the projecting walls of the pronaos
or porch, like the Temple of Nemesis at Rhamnus. (see above, ﬁgure 1.)
[ 35 ]
▪ Amphiprostyle tetrastyle  describes a small temple that has columns at both ends which stand clear of the naos . Tetrastyle
indicates that the columns are four in number, like those of the Temple on the Ilissus in Athens. (ﬁgure 4.)
[ 35 ]
▪ Peripteral hexastyle  describes a temple with a single row of peripheral columns around the naos , with six columns across the
Temple plans
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 12 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
Plans of ancient Greek temples
Top: 1. distyle in antis , 2. amphidistyle in antis , 3. tholos , 4. prostyle tetrastyle , 5. amphiprostyle
tetrastyle ,
Bottom: 6. dipteral octastyle , 7. peripteral hexastyle , 8. pseudoperipteral hexastyle , 9. pseudodipteral
octastyle
front, like the Theseion in Athens. (ﬁgure
7.)
[ 35 ]
▪ Peripteral octastyle  describes a temple
with a single row of columns around the
naos , (ﬁgure 7.)  with eight columns
across the front, like the Parthenon,
Athens. (ﬁgures 6 and 9.)
[ 35 ]
▪ Dipteral decastyle  describes the huge
temple of Apollo at Didyma, with the
naos  surrounded by a double row of
columns, (ﬁgure 6.)  with ten columns
across the entrance front.
[ 35 ]
▪ The Temple of Zeus Olympius at
Agrigentum, is termed Pseudo-periteral
heptastyle , because its encircling
colonnade has pseudo  columns that
are attached to the walls of the naos .
(ﬁgure 8.) Heptastyle  means that it has
seven columns across the entrance
front.
[ 35 ]
The ideal of proportion that was used by
ancient  Greek  architects  in  designing
temples  was  not  a  simple  mathematical
progression  using  a  square  module.  The
math involved a more complex geometrical
progression,  the  so-called  golden  mean .
The ratio is similar to that of the growth
patterns of many spiral forms that occur in
nature such as rams' horns, nautilus  shells,
fern  fronds,  and  vine  tendrils  and  which
were a source of decorative motifs employed by ancient Greek architects as particularly in evidence in the volutes of capitals of the
Ionic and Corinthian Orders.
[ 37 ]
Proportion and optical illusion
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 13 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
The ancient Greek architects took a philosophic approach to the rules and proportions. The determining factor in the mathematics of
any notable work of architecture was its ultimate appearance. The architects calculated for perspective, for the optical illusions that
make edges of objects appear concave and for the fact that columns that are viewed against the sky look different from those adjacent
that are viewed against a shadowed wall. Because of these factors, the architects adjusted the plans so that the major lines of any
significant building are rarely straight.
[ 37 ]
 The most obvious adjustment is to the profile of columns, which narrow from base to top.
However, the narrowing is not regular, but gently curved so that each column appears to have a slight swelling, called entasis  below
the middle. The entasis  is never sufficiently pronounced as to make the swelling wider than the base; it is controlled by a slight
reduction in the rate of decrease of diameter.
[ 8 ]
The main lines of the
Parthenon are all curved.
A sectioned nautilus  shell.
These shells may have
provided inspiration for
voluted Ionic capitals.
The growth of the nautilus
corresponds to the Golden Mean
The Parthenon , the Temple to the Goddess Athena  on the Acropolis  in Athens, is referred to by many as the pinnacle of ancient Greek
architecture. Helen Gardner  refers to its "unsurpassable excellence", to be surveyed, studied and emulated by architects of later ages.
Yet, as Gardner points out, there is hardly a straight line in the building.
[ 38 ]
Banister Fletcher  calculated that the stylobate  curves
upward so that its centres at either end rise about 65 millimetres (2.6 inches) above the outer corners, and 110 mm (4.3 in) on the
longer sides. A slightly greater adjustment has been made to the entablature. The columns at the ends of the building are not vertical
but are inclined towards the centre, with those at the corners being out of plumb by about 65 mm (2.6 in).
[ 8 ]
 These outer columns are
both slightly wider than their neighbours and are slightly closer than any of the others.
[ 39 ]
Style
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 14 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
Orders of ancient Greek architecture
above: Capital of the Ionic
order showing volutes and
ornamented echinus
left: Architectural elements of
the Doric order showing
simple curved echinus of
capital
above: Capital of the Corinthian
Order showing foliate decoration
and vertical volutes.
Ancient  Greek  architecture  of  the  most
formal type, for temples and other public
buildings, is divided stylistically into three
Classical  orders ,  first  described  by  the
Roman  architectural  writer  Vitruvius .
These are: the Doric order , the Ionic order ,
and  the  Corinthian  order , t h e n a m e s
reflecting their regional origins within the
Greek  world.  While  the  three  orders  are
most easily recognizable by their capitals,
they also governed the form, proportions,
details  and  relationships  of  the  columns,
entablature , pediment , a n d t h e stylobate .
[ 3 ]
 The different orders were applied to the
whole range of buildings and monuments.
The  Doric  order  developed  on  mainland
Greece  and  spread  to  Magna  Graecia
(Italy). It was firmly established and well-
defined in its characteristics by the time of
the building of the Temple of Hera  at Olympia , c. 600 BC. The Ionic order co-existed with the Doric, being favoured by the Greek
cities of Ionia , in Asia Minor  and the Aegean Islands . It did not reach a clearly defined form until the mid 5th century BC.
[ 27 ]
 The
early Ionic temples of Asia Minor were particularly ambitious in scale, such as the Temple of Artemis  at Ephesus .
[ 12 ]
 The Corinthian
order was a highly decorative variant not developed until the Hellenistic  period and retaining many characteristics of the Ionic. It
was popularised by the Romans.
[ 8 ]
The Doric order is recognised by its capital, of which the echinus  is like a circular cushion rising from the top of the column to the
square abacus  on which rest the lintels. The echinus appears flat and splayed in early examples, deeper and with greater curve in
later, more refined examples, and smaller and straight-sided in Hellenistic examples.
[ 40 ]
 A refinement of the Doric column is the
entasis , a gentle convex swelling to the profile of the column, which prevents an optical illusion of concavity.
[ 40 ]
 This is more
Orders
Doric order
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 15 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
The Doric Order
The Temple of Hephaestos, Athens, is a well-preserved temple of peripteral hexastyle  plan.
The entablature  showing the
architrave , frieze  with triglyphs
and metopes  and the
overhanging cornice
The tapered ﬂuted columns,
constructed in drums, rest
directly on the stylobate .
pronounced in earlier examples.
Doric columns are almost always cut with grooves, known as "fluting", which run the length of the column and are usually 20 in
number, although sometimes fewer. The flutes meet at sharp edges called arrises . At the top of the columns, slightly below the
narrowest point, and crossing the terminating arrises, are three horizontal grooves known as the hypotrachelion . Doric columns have
no bases, until a few examples in the Hellenistic period.
[ 40 ]
The columns of an early Doric temple such as the Temple of Apollo  at Syracuse, Sicily, may have a height to base diameter ratio of
only 4:1 and a column height to entablature ratio of 2:1, with relatively crude details. A column height to diameter of 6:1 became
more  usual,  while  the  column  height  to  entablature  ratio  at  the  Parthenon  is  about  3:1.  During  the  Hellenistic  period,  Doric
conventions of solidity and masculinity dropped away, with the slender and unfluted columns reaching a height to diameter ratio of
7.5:1.
[ 40 ]
The Doric entablature  i s i n t h r e e
parts, the architrave , the frieze  and
the  cornice . T h e a r c h i t r a v e i s
composed  of  the  stone  lintels
which span the space between the
columns,  with  a  joint  occurring
above  the  centre  of  each  abacus.
On this rests the frieze, one of the
major  areas  of  sculptural
decoration.  The  frieze  is  divided
into  triglyphs  a n d metopes , t h e
triglyphs,  as  stated  elsewhere  in
this article, are a reminder of the
timber history of the architectural
style. Each triglyph has three vertical grooves, similar to the columnar fluting, and below them, seemingly connected, are guttae ,
small strips that appear to connect the triglyphs to the architrave below.
[ 40 ]
 A triglyph is located above the centre of each capital, and
above the centre of each lintel. However, at the corners of the building, the triglyphs do not fall over the centre the column. The
ancient architects took a pragmatic approach to the apparent "rules", simply extending the width of the last two metopes at each end
of the building.
The cornice is a narrow jutting band of complex molding , which overhangs and protects the ornamented frieze, like the edge of an
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 16 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
The Ionic Order
The Erechtheion, Acropolis, Athens: a building of asymmetrical plan, for the display of offerings to Athena
Corner capital with a diagonal
volute , showing also details of the
ﬂuting separated by ﬁllets.
Frieze of stylised alternating
palms and reeds, and a cornice
decorated with "egg and dart"
moulding.
overhanging wooden-framed roof. It is decorated on the underside with projecting blocks, mutules , further suggesting the wooden
nature of the prototype. At either end of the building the pediment rises from the cornice, framed by moulding of similar form.
[ 40 ]
The pediment is decorated with figures that are in relief  in the earlier examples, though almost free-standing by the time of the
sculpture on the Parthenon . Early architectural sculptors found difficulty in creating satisfactory sculptural compositions in the
tapering triangular space.
[ 41 ]
 By the Early Classical period, with the decoration of the Temple of Zeus  at Olympia (486–460 BC), the
sculptors had solved the problem by having a standing central figure framed by rearing centaurs  and fighting men who are falling,
kneeling and lying in attitudes that fit the size and angle of each part of the space.
[ 38 ]
 The famous sculptor Phidias  fills the space at
the Parthenon (448–432 BC) with a complex array of draped and undraped figures of deities, who appear in attitudes of sublime
relaxation and elegance.
The Ionic order  is recognized by its voluted  capital, in which a curved echinus  of similar shape to that of the Doric order, but
decorated with stylised ornament, is surmounted by a horizontal band that scrolls under to either side, forming spirals or volutes
similar to those of the nautilus  shell or ram's horn. In plan, the capital is rectangular. It is designed to be viewed frontally but the
capitals at the corners of buildings are modified with an additional scroll so as to appear regular on two adjoining faces. In the
Hellenistic period, four-fronted Ionic capitals became common.
[ 42 ]
Like the Doric order, the Ionic
order  retains  signs  of  having
its  origins  in  wooden
architecture.  The  horizontal
spread  of  a  flat  timber  plate
across the top of a column is a
common  device  in  wooden
construction,  giving  a  thin
upright a wider area on which
to bear the lintel, while at the
same  time  reinforcing  the
load-bearing  strength  of  the
lintel  itself.  Likewise,  the
columns always have bases, a
necessity in wooden architecture to spread the load and protect the base of a comparatively thin upright.
[ 42 ]
 The columns are fluted
Ionic order
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 17 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
with narrow, shallow flutes that do not meet at a sharp edge but have a flat band or fillet  between them. The usual number of flutes is
twenty-four but there may be as many as forty-four. The base has two convex mouldings called torus , and from the late Hellenic
period stood on a square plinth similar to the abacus .
[ 42 ]
The architrave of the Ionic order is sometimes undecorated, but more often rises in three outwardly-stepped bands like overlapping
timber planks. The frieze, which runs in a continuous band, is separated from the other members by rows of small projecting blocks.
They are referred to as dentils , meaning "teeth", but their origin is clearly in narrow wooden slats which supported the roof of a
timber structure.
[ 42 ]
 The Ionic order is altogether lighter in appearance than the Doric, with the columns, including base and capital,
having a 9:1 ratio with the diameter, while the whole entablature was also much narrower and less heavy than the Doric entablature.
There was some variation in the distribution of decoration. Formalised bands of motifs such as alternating forms known as egg-and-
dart  were a feature of the Ionic entablatures, along with the bands of dentils. The external frieze often contained a continuous band of
figurative sculpture or ornament, but this was not always the case. Sometimes a decorative frieze occurred around the upper part of
the naos  rather than on the exterior of the building. These Ionic-style friezes around the naos  are sometimes found on Doric
buildings, notably the Parthenon. Some temples, like the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus, had friezes of figures around the lower drum
of each column, separated from the fluted section by a bold moulding.
[ 42 ]
Caryatids , draped female figures used as supporting members to carry the entablature, were a feature of the Ionic order, occurring at
several buildings including the Siphnian Treasury  at Delphi in 525 BC and at the Erechtheion , about 410 BC.
[ 43 ]
The Corinthian order does not have its origin in wooden architecture. It grew directly out of the Ionic in the mid 5th century BC, and
was initially of much the same style and proportion, but distinguished by its more ornate capitals.
[ 44 ]
 The capital was very much
deeper than either the Doric or the Ionic capital, being shaped like a large krater , a bell-shaped mixing bowl, and being ornamented
with a double row of acanthus  leaves above which rose voluted tendrils, supporting the corners of the abacus, which, no longer
perfectly square, splayed above them. According to Vitruvius , the capital was invented by a bronze founder, Callimachus  of Corinth,
who took his inspiration from a basket of offerings that had been placed on a grave, with a flat tile on top to protect the goods. The
basket had been placed on the root of an acanthus plant which had grown up around it.
[ 44 ]
 The ratio of the column height to
diameter is generally 10:1, with the capital taking up more than 1/10 of the height. The ratio of capital height to diameter is generally
about 1.16:1.
[ 44 ]
The Corinthian order was initially used internally, as at the Temple of Apollo Epicurius  at Bassae (c. 450–425 BC). In 334 BC, it
appeared as an external feature on the Choragic Monument of Lysicrates  in Athens, and then on a huge scale at the Temple of Zeus
Olympia in Athens (174 BC–132 AD).
[ 44 ]
 It was popularised by the Romans, who added a number of refinements and decorative
Corinthian order
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 18 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
The Corinthian Order
The Temple of Zeus Olympia, Athens, ("the Olympieion")
The tall capital combines both semi-
naturalistic leaves and highly stylised
tendrils forming volutes.
Architectural ornament of ﬁred and painted clay
This Archaic gorgon's head anteﬁx
has been cast in a mould, ﬁred and
painted.
The lion's head gargoyle is ﬁxed
to a revetment on which elements
of a formal frieze have been
painted.
details.  During  the  Hellenistic  period,  Corinthian
columns were sometimes built without fluting.
[ 44 ]
Early wooden structures, particularly temples, were ornamented
and in part protected by fired and painted terracotta  revetments in
the  form  of  rectangular  panels,  and  ornamental  discs.  Many
fragments of these have outlived the buildings that they decorated
and demonstrate a wealth of formal border designs of geometric
scrolls,  overlapping  patterns  and  foliate  motifs.
[ 45 ]
 With  the
introduction  of  stone-built  temples,  the  revetments  no  longer
served  a  protective  purpose  and  sculptured  decoration  became
more common.
The  clay  ornaments  were  limited  to  the  roof  of  buildings,
decorating  the  cornice,  the  corners  and  surmounting  the
pediment. At the corners of pediments they were called acroteria
and along the sides of the building, antefixes .  Early  decorative
elements were generally semi-circular, but later of roughly triangular shape with moulded ornament, often palmate.
[ 45 ] [ 46 ]
 Ionic
Decoration
Architectural ornament
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 19 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
The Archaic Gorgon  of the western
pediment  from the Artemis Temple of
Corfu, Archaeological Museum of Corfu .
cornices were often set with a row of lion's masks, with open mouths that ejected rainwater.
[ 28 ] [ 46 ]
 From the Late Classical period,
acroteria were sometimes sculptured figures (see Architectural sculpture ).
[ 47 ]
In the three orders of ancient Greek architecture, the sculptural decoration, be it a simple half round astragal , a frieze of stylised
foliage or the ornate sculpture of the pediment, is all essential to the architecture of which it is a part. In the Doric order, there is no
variation in its placement. Reliefs never decorate walls in an arbitrary way. The sculpture is always located in several predetermined
areas, the metopes and the pediment.
[ 45 ]
 In later Ionic architecture, there is greater diversity in the types and numbers of mouldings
and decorations, particularly around doorways, where voluted brackets  sometimes occur supporting an ornamental cornice over a
door, such as that at the Erechtheion.
[ 28 ] [ 30 ] [ 45 ]
 A much applied narrow moulding is called "bead and reel" and is symmetrical,
stemming from turned wooden prototypes. Wider mouldings include one with tongue-like or pointed leaf shapes, which are grooved
and sometimes turned upward at the tip, and "egg and dart" moulding which alternates ovoid shapes with narrow pointed ones.
[ 28 ]
[ 45 ] [ 48 ]
Architectural sculpture  showed a development from early Archaic examples through Severe
Classical, High Classical, Late Classical and Hellenistic.
[ 1 ]
 Remnants of Archaic architectural
sculpture  (700–500  BC)  exist  from  the  early  6th  century  BC  with  the  earliest  surviving
pedimental sculptures  being fragments of a Gorgon flanked by heraldic panthers from the
centre of the pediment of the Artemis Temple of Corfu .
[ 49 ]
 A metope from a temple known as
"Temple C" at Selinus, Sicily, shows, in a better preserved state, Perseus  slaying the Gorgon
Medusa .
[ 41 ]
 Both images parallel the stylised depiction of the Gorgons on the black figure
name vase decorated by the Nessos painter (c. 600 BC), with the face and shoulders turned
frontally, and the legs in a running or kneeling position. At this date, images of terrifying
monsters have predominance over the emphasis on the human figure that developed with
Humanist philosophy.
[ 49 ]
Early pedimental sculptures, and those on smaller temples, were usually in relief , and the
late free-standing ones were often in terracotta, which has survived only in fragments. The
sculptures were covered with a layer of stucco and painted or, if terracotta, painted with the more restrained fired colours of Greek
pottery.
[ 50 ]
The Severe Classical Style  (500–450 BC) is represented by the pedimental sculptures of the Temple of Zeus at Olympia (470–456
BC). The eastern pediment shows a moment of stillness and "impending drama" before the beginning of a chariot race, the figures of
Architectural sculpture
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 20 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
Classical ﬁgurative sculpture from the eastern pediment of
the Parthenon, British Museum .
Zeus and the competitors being severe and idealised representations of the human form.
[ 51 ]
 The western pediment has Apollo as the
central figure, "majestic" and "remote", presiding over a battle of Lapiths  and Centaurs , in strong contrast to that of the eastern
pediment for its depiction of violent action, and described by Donald E. Strong as the "most powerful piece of illustration" for a
hundred years.
[ 51 ]
The  reliefs  and  three-dimensional  sculpture  which  adorned  the  frieze  and
pediments, respectively, of the Parthenon, are the lifelike products of the High
Classical  style  (450–400  BC)  and  were  created  under  the  direction  of  the
sculptor  Phidias .
[ 52 ]
 The  pedimental  sculpture  represents  the  Gods  of
Olympus, while the frieze shows the Panathenaic procession and ceremonial
events that took place every four years to honour the titular Goddess of Athens.
[ 52 ]
 The frieze and remaining figures of the eastern pediment show a profound
understanding  of  the  human  body,  and  how  it  varies  depending  upon  its
position and  the  stresses  that  action  and  emotion place  upon it. Benjamin
Robert Haydon described the reclining figure of Dionysus  as "the most heroic
style of art, combined with all the essential detail of actual life".
[ 53 ]
The names of many famous sculptors are known from the Late Classical period
(400–323 BC), including Timotheos , Praxiteles , Leochares  and Skopas ,  but
their works are known mainly from Roman copies.
[ 1 ]
 Little architectural sculpture of the period remains intact. The Temple  of
Asclepius at Epidauros  had sculpture by Timotheos working with the architect Theodotos. Fragments of the eastern pediment
survive, showing the Sack of Troy . The scene appears to have filled the space with figures carefully arranged to fit the slope and shape
available, as with the earlier east pediment of the Temple of Zeus at Olympus. But the figures are more violent in action, the central
space taken up, not with a commanding God, but with the dynamic figure of Neoptolemos  as he seizes the aged king Priam  and stabs
him. The remaining fragments give the impression of a range of human emotions, fear, horror, cruelty and lust for conquest.
[ 47 ]
 The
acroteria  were sculptured by Timotheus, except for that at the centre of the east pediment which is the work of the architect. The
palmate acroteria have been replaced here with small figures, the eastern pediment being surmounted by a winged Nike , poised
against the wind.
[ 47 ]
Hellenistic architectural sculpture (323–31 BC) was to become more flamboyant, both in the rendering of expression and motion,
which is often emphasised by flowing draperies, the Nike Samothrace  which decorated a monument in the shape of a ship being a
well-known example. The Pergamon Altar  (c. 180–160 BC) has a frieze (120 metres long by 2.3 metres high) of figures in very high
relief. The frieze represents the battle for supremacy of Gods and Titans, and employs many dramatic devices: frenzy, pathos and
triumph, to convey the sense of conflict.
[ 54 ]
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 21 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
Architecture portal
Metopes, friezes and caryatid
Archaic metope: Perseus
and Medusa , Temple C at
Selinunte.
Severe Classical metope:
Labours of Hercules , Temple
of Zeus, Olympus
High Classical frieze:
Panathenaic Ritual ,
Parthenon, Athens
Hellenistic frieze: Battle
of Gods and Titans , the
Pergamon Altar.
Ionic caryatid from the
Erechtheion, Athens
▪ Ancient Greek art
▪ Ancient Roman architecture
▪ Byzantine architecture
▪ Classical architecture
▪ Greek culture
▪ Greek technology
▪ List of ancient architectural records
▪ List of ancient Greek temples
▪ Modern Greek architecture
▪ Outline of classical architecture
See also
References
Citations
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 22 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
1. Boardman et al. 1967 .
2. Lawrence 1957 , pp. 83–84.
3. Gardner, Kleiner & Mamiya 2004 , pp. 126–132.
4. Pevsner 1943 , p. 19.
5. Boardman et al. 1967 , pp. 10–14.
6. Fletcher 1996 , pp. 89–91.
7. Higgins & Higgins 1996 , Chapter 3.
8. Fletcher 1996 , pp. 93–97.
9. Gardner, Kleiner & Mamiya 2004 , pp. 110–114.
10. Gardner, Kleiner & Mamiya 2004 , pp. 90–109.
11. Fletcher 1996 ; Gardner, Kleiner & Mamiya 2004 .
12. Strong 1965 , p. 35.
13. Strong 1965 , pp. 33–102.
14. Strong 1965 , pp. 39–40, 62–66.
15. Fletcher 1996 , pp. 119–121.
16. Strong 1965 , pp. 35–36.
17. Lawrence 1957 , pp. 65–67.
18. Fletcher 1996 , pp. 151–153.
19. Neer 2012 .
20. Penrose 1893 , pp. 42–43.
21. Boardman et al. 1967 , pp. 49–50.
22. Strong 1965 , pp. 74–75.
23. Fletcher 1996 , p. 97.
24. Moffett, Fazio & Wodehouse 2003 , pp. 62–64.
25. Fletcher 1996 , pp. 147–148.
26. "Ofﬁcial Report 2004 vol. 2"  ( https://digital.la84.org/digital/coll
ection/p17103coll8/id/43496/rec/84 ) . digital.la84.org . p. 237 .
Retrieved 2023-08-13 .
27. Strong 1965 , pp. 38–40.
28. Fletcher 1996 , p. 107.
29. Fletcher 1996 , p. 155.
30. Fletcher 1996 , p. 159.
31. Boardman et al. 1967 , p. 25.
32. Boardman et al. 1967 , p. 12; Rostoker & Gebhard 1981 ,
p. 212.
33. Goldberg 1983 , pp. 305–309.
34. Wikander 1990 , pp. 285–289.
35. Fletcher 1996 , pp. 107–109.
36. Fletcher 1996 .
37. Fletcher 1996 , p. 126.
38. Gardner, Kleiner & Mamiya 2004 , pp. 138–148.
39. Moffett, Fazio & Wodehouse 2003 , pp. 50–53.
40. Fletcher 1996 , pp. 108–112.
41. Strong 1965 , pp. 58–60.
42. Fletcher 1996 , pp. 125–129.
43. Boardman et al. 1967 , pp. 45, 49.
44. Fletcher 1996 , pp. 137–139.
45. Boardman et al. 1967 , pp. 22–25.
46. Fletcher 1996 , p. 163.
47. Boardman et al. 1967 , p. 435.
48. Fletcher 1996 , p. 164.
49. Strong 1965 , pp. 39–40.
50. Lawrence 1957 , pp. 110–111.
51. Strong 1965 , pp. 61–62.
52. Gardner, Kleiner & Mamiya 2004 , pp. 143–148.
53. Gardner, Kleiner & Mamiya 2004 , p. 145.
54. Boardman et al. 1967 , pp. 509–510.
▪ Boardman, John ; Dorig, Jose; Fuchs, Werner; Hirmer, Max (1967). The Art and Architecture of Ancient Greece . London: Thames
and Hudson.
Sources
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 23 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
▪ Fletcher, Banister (1996) [1896]. Cruickshank, Dan (ed.). Sir Banister's A History of Architecture  ( https://books.google.com/book
s?id=Gt1jTpXAThwC )  (20th ed.). Oxford: Architectural Press. ISBN   0-7506-2267-9 .
▪ Doxiadis, Constantinos A.  (1972). Architectural Space in Ancient Greece  ( https://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/5057/Archit
ectural-Space-in-Ancient-Greece ) . Cambridge: MIT Press . ISBN   9780262368087 .
▪ Gardner, Helen; Kleiner, Fred S.; Mamiya, Christin J. (2004). Gardner's Art through the Ages  (12th ed.). Belmont, California:
Thomson Wadsworth. ISBN   0-15-505090-7 .
▪ Goldberg, Marilyn Y. (July 1983). "Greek Temples and Chinese Roofs". American Journal of Archaeology . 87  (3): 305– 310.
doi : 10.2307/504798  ( https://doi.org/10.2307%2F504798 ) . JSTOR   504798  ( https://www.jstor.org/stable/504798 ) .
S2CID   191380231  ( https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:191380231 ) .
▪ Higgins, Michael Denis; Higgins, Reynold (1996). A Geological Companion to Greece and the Aegean  ( http://uqac.ca/mhiggins/g
cga/Geological%20companion%20to%20Greece%20-%20Higgins%20compressed.pdf ) (PDF) . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press. ISBN   0-8014-3337-1 .
▪ Lawrence, Arnold Walter  (1957). Greek Architecture (Penguin History of Art) . Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
▪ Moffett, Marian; Fazio, Michael W.; Wodehouse, Laurence (2003). A World History of Architecture . London: Laurence King
Publishing. ISBN   1-85669-353-8 .
▪ Neer, Richard T. (2012). Greek Art and Archaeology: A New History, c. 2500–c. 150 BCE  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=LX
6TZwEACAAJ ) . New York, New York: Thames & Hudson. ISBN   978-0-500-28877-1 . OCLC   745332893  ( https://search.worldcat.o
rg/oclc/745332893 ) .
▪ Nevett, Lisa C. (2023). Ancient Greek Housing . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN   9780521198721 .
▪ Sideris, Athanasios (2008). "Re-contextualized Antiquity: Interpretative VR Visualisation of Ancient Art and Architecture". In
Mikropoulos, T. A.; Papachristos, N. M. (eds.). Proceedings: International Symposium on "Information and Communication
Technologies in Cultural Heritage" October 16–18, 2008  ( https://www.academia.edu/481085 ) . Ioannina: The University of
Ioannina. pp.  159– 176. ISBN   9789609869102 .
▪ Stierlin, Henri (2004). Greece: From Mycenae to the Parthenon . Köln: Taschen.
▪ Strong, Donald E.  (1965). The Classical World . London: Paul Hamlyn.
▪ Penrose, Francis (11 May 1893). "The Orientation of Geek Temples"  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=EpkZtUGY5y8C&pg=P
A42 ) . Nature . 48  (1228): 42– 43.
▪ Pevsner, Nikolaus (1943). An Outline of European Architecture . London: John Murray.
▪ Rostoker, William; Gebhard, Elizabeth (Summer 1981). "The Reproduction of Rooftiles for the Archaic Temple of Poseidon at
Isthmia, Greece". Journal of Field Archaeology . 8  (2): 211– 212. doi : 10.1179/009346981791505076  ( https://doi.org/10.1179%2F0
09346981791505076 ) .
▪ Wikander, Örjan  (January–March 1990). "Archaic Roof Tiles the First Generations". Hesperia . 59  (1): 285– 290. JSTOR   148143
( https://www.jstor.org/stable/148143 ) .
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 24 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
▪ Cartwright, Mark (6 January 2013). "Greek Architecture"  ( https://www.worldhistory.org/Greek_Architecture/ ) . World History
Encyclopedia . Retrieved 8 May  2021 .
▪ The Foundations of Classical Architecture Part Two: Greek Classicism  ( https://www.classicist.org/articles/the-foundations-of-clas
sical-architecture-greek-classicism/ )  – Free educational program by the ICAA (published August 29, 2018)
▪ Joseph Woods  (1828), Letters of an Architect, From France, Italy, and Greece  ( https://gutenberg.org/ebooks/author/52716 ) .
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Greek_architecture&oldid=1335475178 "
External links
Ancient Greek architecture - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ancient_Greek_architecture
Стр. 25 из 25 01.03.2026, 13:49
