French ivory Virgin and Child , end of the
13th century, 25 cm high, curving to ﬁt the
shape of the ivory tusk.
French art
French art  consists of the visual  and plastic arts  (including French architecture , woodwork,
textiles, and ceramics) originating from the geographical area of France . Modern France was
the main centre for the European art of the Upper Paleolithic ,  then left many megalithic
monuments, and in the Iron Age  many of the most impressive finds of early Celtic art . The
Gallo-Roman  period left a distinctive provincial style of sculpture, and the region around the
modern Franco-German border led the empire in the mass production of finely decorated
Ancient Roman pottery , which was exported to Italy and elsewhere on a large scale. With
Merovingian art  the story of French styles as a distinct and influential element in the wider
development of the art of Christian Europe begins.
Romanesque and Gothic architecture flourished in medieval France with Gothic architecture
originating  from  the  Île-de-France  and  Picardy  regions  of  northern  France.
[ 1 ] [ 2 ]
 T h e
Renaissance  led to Italy becoming the main source of stylistic developments until France
became  the  leading  artistic  influence  after  Louis  XIV's  reign,  during  the  Rococo  a n d
Neoclassicism  periods.
[ 3 ]
 During the 19th century and up to mid-20th century France and
especially  Paris  was  considered  the  center  of  the  art  world  with  art  styles  such  as
Impressionism , Post-Impressionism , Cubism , Fauvism  o r i g i n a t i n g t h e r e a s w e l l a s
movements and congregations of foreign artists such as the École de Paris .
[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ]
Currently, the earliest known European art is from the Upper Palaeolithic  period of between
40,000 and 10,000 years ago and France has a large selection of extant pre-historic art  from
the Châtelperronian , Aurignacian , Solutrean , Gravettian , and Magdalenian  cultures. This art
Historic overview
Prehistory
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 1 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Front and side view of the Venus of
Brassempouy
The Menec alignments , the most
well-known megalithic site
among the Carnac stones
includes cave paintings , such as the famous paintings at Pech Merle  in the Lot  in Languedoc
which  date  back  to  16,000  BC,  Lascaux , l o c a t e d n e a r t h e v i l l a g e o f Montignac , i n t h e
Dordogne , dating back to between 13,000 and 15,000 BC, or perhaps, as far back as 25,000
BC, the Cosquer Cave , the Chauvet Cave  dating back to 29,000 BC, and the Trois-Frères cave ;
and portable art , such as animal carvings and great goddess statuettes called Venus figurines ,
such as the " Venus of Brassempouy  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20060904222320/http://
www.musee-antiquitesnationales.fr/pages/page_id18159_u1l2.htm ) " o f 2 1 , 0 0 0 B C ,
discovered in the Landes , now in the museum at the Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye  or
the Venus of Lespugue  at the Musée de l'Homme . Ornamental beads, bone pins, carvings, as
well as flint and stone arrowheads  also are among the prehistoric objects from the area of
France.
Speculations exist that only Homo sapiens  are capable of artistic expression, however, a
recent find, the Mask of la Roche-Cotard —a Mousterian  or Neanderthal  artifact, found in
2002 in a cave near the banks of the Loire River , dating back to about 33,000 B.C. —now suggests that Neanderthal humans may
have developed a sophisticated and complex artistic tradition.
In the Neolithic  period ( see Neolithic Europe ), megalithic  (large stone) monuments, such as the
dolmens  a n d menhirs  a t Carnac , Saint-Sulpice-de-Faleyrens  and  elsewhere  in  France  begin  to
appear; this appearance is thought to start in the fifth  millennium BC, although some authors
speculate about Mesolithic  roots. In France there are some 5,000 megalithics monuments, mainly in
Brittany, where there is the largest concentration of these monuments. In this area there is a wide
variety of these monuments that have been well preserved, such as menhirs, dolmens, cromlechs
and cairns. The Cairn of Gavrinis  in southern Brittany is an outstanding example of megalithic art :
its  14 meters  inner corridor is  nearly  completely  adorned  with  ornamental  carvings. The  great
broken menhir of Er-Grah , now in four pieces, was more than 20 meters high originally, making it
the largest menhir ever erected. France also has numerous painted stones, polished stone axes, and
inscribed menhirs from this period. The Grand-Pressigny area was known for its precious silex
blades and they were extensively exported during the Neolithic.
In France from the Neolithic to the Bronze Age , one finds a variety of archaeological cultures, including the Rössen culture  of
c.   4500 –4000 BC, Beaker culture  of c.   2800 –1900 BC, Tumulus culture  of c.   1600 –1200 BC, Urnfield culture  of c.   1300 –800 BC,
and, in a transition to the Iron Age , Hallstatt culture  of c.   1200 –500 BC.
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 2 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Agris Helmet
Théâtre antique d'Orange
For more on Prehistoric sites in Western France, see Prehistory of Brittany .
From the Proto-Celtic  Urnfield and Hallstatt cultures, a continental Iron Age Celtic art  developed; mainly
associated with La Tène culture , which flourished during the late Iron Age from 450 BC to the Roman
conquest in the first century BC. This art drew on native, classical and perhaps, the Mediterranean , oriental
sources. The Celts of Gaul  are known through numerous tombs and burial mounds found throughout
France.
Celtic art is very ornamental, avoiding straight lines and only occasionally using symmetry, without the
imitation of nature nor ideal of beauty central to the classical  tradition, but apparently, often involves
complex  symbolism.  This  artwork  includes  a  variety  of  styles  and  often  incorporates  subtly  modified
elements from other cultures, an example being the characteristic over-and-under interlacing which arrived
in France only in the sixth century, although it was already used by Germanic  artists. The Celtic Vix grave  in
present-day Burgundy revealed the largest bronze crater of the Antiquity, that was probably imported by
Celtic aristocrats from Greece.
The region of Gaul ( Latin : Gallia ) came under the rule of the Roman Empire  from the first century
BC to the fifth century AD. Southern France, and especially Provence and Languedoc, is known for
its many intact Gallo-Roman monuments. Lugdunum , modern Lyon, was at the time of the Roman
Empire the largest city outside Italy and gave birth to two Roman Emperors. The city still boasts
some  Roman  remains  including  a  Theater.  Monumental  works  from  this  period  include  the
amphitheater  in Orange, Vaucluse , the " Maison Carrée " at Nîmes  which is one of the best preserved
Roman  temples  in  Europe,  the  city  of  Vienne  near  Lyon,  which  features  an  exceptionally  well
preserved temple (the temple of Augustus and Livia), a circus as well as other remains, the Pont du
Gard aqueduct  which is also in an exceptional state of preservation, the Roman cities of Glanum  and
Vaison-la-Romaine , two intact Gallo-Roman arenas in Nîmes  and Arles , and the Roman baths , and
the arena  of Paris .
Celtic and Roman periods
Medieval period
Merovingian art
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 3 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Aachen Gospels, c. 820, an example of
Carolingian illumination
Merovingian art is the art and architecture of the Merovingian  dynasty of the Franks , which lasted from the fifth century to the eighth
century in present-day France and Germany . The advent of the Merovingian dynasty in Gaul  during the fifth century led to important
changes in the arts. In architecture, there was no longer the desire to build robust and harmonious buildings. Sculpture regressed to
being little more than a simple technique for the ornamentation of sarcophagi , altars , and ecclesiastical furniture. On the other hand,
the rise of gold work  and manuscript illumination  brought about a resurgence of Celtic  decoration, which, with Christian  and other
contributions, constitutes the basis of Merovingian art. The unification of the Frankish  kingdom under Clovis I  (465–511) and his
successors,  corresponded  with  the  need  to  build  churches.  The  plans  for  them  probably  were  copied  from  Roman basilicas .
Unfortunately,  these  timber  structures  have  not  survived  because  of  destruction  by  fire,  whether  accidental  or  caused  by  the
Normans  at the time of their incursions.
Carolingian art is the approximate 120-year period from 750 to 900—during the reign of
Charles  Martel , Pippin  the  Younger , Charlemagne ,  and  his  immediate  heirs—popularly
known as the Carolingian Renaissance . The Carolingian era is the first period of the medieval
art movement known as Pre-Romanesque . For the first time, Northern European kings
patronized classical Mediterranean Roman art forms, blending classical forms with Germanic
ones, creating entirely new innovations in figurine line drawing, and setting the stage for the
rise of Romanesque art  and, eventually, Gothic art  in the West.
Illuminated  manuscripts,  metalwork,  small-scale  sculpture,  mosaics,  and  frescos  survive
from the period. The Carolingians also undertook major architectural building campaigns at
numerous churches in France. These include those of Metz , Lyon , Vienne , Le Mans , Reims ,
Beauvais , Verdun , Saint-Germain in Auxerre , Saint-Pierre in Flavigny , and Saint-Denis , as
well as the town center of Chartres . The Centula Abbey  of Saint-Riquier  ( Somme ), completed
in  788,  was  a  major  achievement  in  monastic  architecture.  Another  important  building
(mostly lost today) was "Theodulf's Villa" in Germigny-des-Prés .
With the end of Carolingian rule around 900, artistic production halted for almost three
generations.  After  the  demise  of  the  Carolingian  Empire,  France  split  into  a  number  of
feuding provinces, lacking any organized patronage. French art of the tenth and eleventh
centuries was produced by local monasteries to promote literacy and piety, however, the primitive styles produced were not so highly
skilled as the techniques of the earlier Carolingian period.
Carolingian art
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 4 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Central tympanum of the narthex of the
Vézelay Abbey  in Vézelay , 1140–1150
Multiple regional styles developed based on the chance availability of Carolingian manuscripts as models to copy, and the availability
of itinerant artists. The monastery of Saint Bertin became an important center under its abbot Odbert (986–1007), who created a
new style based on Anglo-Saxon and Carolingian forms. The nearby abbey of St. Vaast  (Pas-de-Calais) also created a number of
important works. In southwestern France a number of manuscripts were produced c. 1000, at the monastery of Saint Martial  in
Limoges , as well as at Albi , Figeac , and Saint-Sever-de-Rustan  in Gascony . In Paris a unique style developed at the abbey of Saint-
Germain-des-Prés . In Normandy  a new style arose in 975. By the later tenth century with the Cluny  reform movement and a revived
spirit for the concept of Empire, art production resumed.
Romanesque art  refers to the art of Western Europe during a period of one hundred and fifty
years, from approximately 1000 AD to the rise of the Gothic style , which arose in the middle
of the twelfth century in France. "Romanesque Art" was marked by a renewed interest in
Roman construction techniques. For example, the twelfth-century capitals on the cloister of
Saint-Guilhem-le-Désert , adopt an acanthus -leaf motif  and the decorative use of drill holes,
which  were  commonly  found  on  Roman  monuments.  Other  important  Romanesque
buildings in France include the abbey of Saint-Benoît-sur-Loire  in Loiret , the churches of
Saint-Foy  i n Conques  o f Aveyron ,  Saint-Martin  in  Tours ,  Saint-Philibert  in  Tournus  o f
Saône-et-Loire , Saint-Remi  in Reims , and Saint-Sernin  in Toulouse . In particular, Normandy
experienced  a  large  building  campaign  in  the  churches  of  Bernay , Mont-Saint-Michel ,
Coutances Cathedral , and Bayeux .
Most Romanesque sculpture was integrated into church architecture, not only for aesthetic,
but also for structural purposes. Small-scale sculpture during the pre-Romanesque period
was influenced by Byzantine  and Early Christian  sculpture. Other elements were adopted
from various local styles of Middle Eastern countries. Motifs were derived from the arts of
the "barbarian," such as grotesque figures, beasts, and geometric patterns, which were all
important additions, particularly in the regions north of the Alps. Among the important
sculptural works of the period are the ivory carvings at the monastery of Saint Gall . Monumental sculpture was rarely practised
separately from architecture in the Pre-Romanesque period. For the first time after the fall of the Roman empire, monumental
sculpture emerged as a significant art form. Covered church façades , doorways, and capitals  all increased and expanded in size and
importance, as in the Last Judgment Tympanum , Beaulieu-sur-Dordogne , and the Standing Prophet at Moissac . Monumental doors,
baptismal fonts, and candle holders, frequently decorated with scenes from biblical history, were cast in bronze, attesting to the skills
of the contemporary metalworkers. Frescoes were applied to the vaults and walls of churches. Rich textiles and precious objects in
Romanesque art
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 5 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Interior of the Chapelle Haute,
Sainte Chapelle , Paris
The Western (Royal) Portal at
Chartres Cathedral, c.  1145,
these architectural statues are
the earliest Gothic sculptures, a
revolution in style and the
models for a generation of
sculptors
gold and silver, such as chalices and reliquaries, were produced in increasing numbers to meet the
needs of the liturgy, and to serve the cult of the saints. In the twelfth century, large-scale stone
sculpture spread throughout Europe. In the French Romanesque churches of Provence , Burgundy ,
and Aquitaine , sculptures adorned the façades and statues were incorporated into the capitals.
Gothic  art  and  architecture  were  products  of  a  medieval  art
movement  that  lasted  about  three  hundred  years.  It  began  in
France, developing from the Romanesque period in the mid-twelfth
century. By the late fourteenth century, it had evolved toward a
more  secular  and  natural  style  known  as  International  Gothic ,
which continued until the late fifteenth century, when it evolved
further, into Renaissance art . The primary Gothic art media were
sculpture , panel  painting , stained  glass , fresco , a n d illuminated
manuscript .
Gothic architecture was born in the middle of the twelfth century in
Île-de-France , when Abbot Suger  built the abbey at St. Denis , c.
1140, considered the first Gothic building, and soon afterward, the
Chartres  Cathedral , c.  1 1 4 5 . P r i o r t o t h i s , t h e r e h a d b e e n n o
sculpture tradition in Île-de-France—so sculptors were brought in
from  Burgundy ,  who  created  the  revolutionary  figures  acting  as
columns in the Western (Royal) Portal of Chartres Cathedral ( see
image )  —  it  was  an  entirely  new  invention  in  French  art,  and  would  provide  the  model  for  a
generation of sculptors. Other notable Gothic churches in France include Bourges Cathedral , Notre-
Dame de Laon , Notre-Dame  in Paris , Reims Cathedral , Amiens Cathedral  and the Sainte-Chapelle  in
Paris .
The designations of styles in French Gothic architecture are as follows: Early Gothic, High Gothic,
Rayonnant , and Late Gothic or Flamboyant . Division into these divisions is effective, but debatable. Because Gothic cathedrals were
built over several successive periods, and the artisans of each period not necessarily following the wishes of previous periods, the
dominant architectural style often changed during the building of a particular building. Consequently, it is difficult to declare one
building as belonging to a certain era of Gothic architecture. It is more useful to use the terms as descriptors for specific elements
Gothic
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 6 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
The Goldenes Röss , c. 1402 ,
made in Paris for king Charles VI
within a structure, rather than applying it to the building as a whole : the Western portal of Chartres
cathedral is an example of Early gothic while the West and North transept portals, dating back to the
early 13th-century, are typical of High Gothic.
The French ideas spread. Gothic sculpture evolved from the early stiff and elongated style, still
partly Romanesque, into a spatial and naturalistic treatment in the late twelfth and early thirteenth
century. French architects and sculptors were active abroad, in England, Spain and the Holy Roman
Empire: the gothic sculptures of the Door of the Sarmental in Burgos cathedral  in Spain were made
by  French  artists  while  the  anonymous  German  sculptor  from  the  13th-century  known  as  the
Naumburg Master  is presumed to be of French origin. Influences from surviving ancient Greek and
Roman sculptures were incorporated into the treatment of drapery, facial expression, and pose of
the Dutch-Burgundian sculptor, Claus Sluter , and the taste for naturalism first signaled the end of
Gothic sculpture, evolving into the classicistic Renaissance style by the end of the fifteenth century.
Paris, at the time, the largest city in the Western world , became a leading center for the production
of luxurious artifacts in the 13th and 14th century, especially little ivory sculptures and ivory caskets
with scenes of courtly love  (such as Casket with Scenes of Romances  in the Walters Art Museum ).
Paris also developed into one of the most exuberant centers for the production of jewellery and
precious reliquaries, such as the Holy Thorn Reliquary  made for Jean, duke of Berry  or the Goldenes
Rössl  of Altötting , made for Charles VI , king of France.
French Gothic art
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 7 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
A capital of the south portal of
Bourges Cathedral , circa 1160–
1170
Last Judgment portal of the West
facade of Amiens Cathedral ,
1220–1230
Smiling Angel  of Reims
Cathedral , 1236–1245
Stained glass of the western rose
lancets of Chartres Cathedral ,
middle of the 12th century
Casket with Scenes from
Romances, circa 1310–1330
Scenes from the Life of Saint
Benedict , 1250-1260 stone relief
Painting in a style that may be called "Gothic" did not appear until about 1200, nearly fifty years after the start of Gothic architecture
and sculpture. The transition from Romanesque to Gothic is very imprecise and by no means clearly delineated, but one may see the
beginning of a style that is more somber, dark, and emotional than the previous period. This transition occurs first in England and
France around 1200, in Germany around 1220, and in Italy around 1300. Painting, the representation of images on a surface, was
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 8 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
A page from the
Ingeborg Psalter ,
Northern France, c.
1195.
Enguerrand Quarton , The Coronation of
the Virgin , 1452–53
practiced during the Gothic period in four primary crafts, frescos , panel paintings , manuscript illumination , and stained glass .
Frescoes continued to be used as the main pictorial narrative craft on church walls in southern Europe as a continuation of early
Christian and Romanesque traditions. In the north, stained glass and manuscript illumination remained the dominant art form until
the fifteenth century.
At the end of the 14th century and during the 15th century French princely courts such as those of the dukes
of Burgundy, the duke of Anjou or the duke of Berry as well as the pope and the cardinals in Avignon
employed renowned painters, such as the Netherlandish Limbourg Brothers , Barthélemy d'Eyck  and Jean
Hey  and the French painters Enguerrand Quarton , Jean Fouquet  or Nicolas Froment  who developed the
so-called  International  Gothic  style  that  spread  through  Europe  and  incorporated  the  new  Flemish
influence and, later, the innovations of the Italian early Renaissance artists. Sculptors from Flanders and
the Netherlands also worked extensivly for the Burgundian court, like Claus Sluter , who created the well of
Moses  in Dijon, and Claus de Werve , renovating sculpture with a new expressive and natutalistic style, and
later joined by the Spanish Jean de la Huerta  and the French Antoine Le Moiturier . Northern France was
also the main European center for illuminated manuscripts  production. Illuminated manuscripts represent
the most complete record of Gothic painting, providing a record of styles in places where no monumental
works have otherwise survived.
The earliest full manuscripts with French Gothic illustrations date
to  the  middle  of  the  13th  century.
[ 10 ]
 Many  such  illuminated
manuscripts  were  royal  bibles,  although  psalters  also  included
illustrations; the Parisian Psalter of Saint Louis , dating from 1253
to 1270, features 78 full-page illuminations in tempera  paint and gold leaf.
[ 11 ]
Illuminated manuscripts flourished especially in the 15th century, thanks to the many ducal
courts that rose to power in France at the time. In the 15th century, these precious painted
books  were  usually  made  by  Flemish  painters  from  the  Burgundian  Netherlands  (then
under the French rule of the dukes of Burgundy) or French painters in the service of the
main princely courts (the king's court in Paris, but also the ducal courts of Burgundy,
Anjou, Berry, Bourbon, Orléans and Brittany). The king of Sicily and duke of Anjou, René
was himself a writer of courtly love novels and asked the best artists to decorate his own
writings with elaborate paintings, such as the Livre du cœur d'Amour épris  illuminated by
Barthélémy d'Eyck. The Limbourg brothers were responsible for the Très riches heures du
duc de Berry , considered the masterpiece of International gothic manuscripts, made for the Duke of Berry, king Charles V 's brother.
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 9 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
French Gothic art
Jean Fouquet , Virgin and Child
Surrounded by Angels , right wing
of the Melun Diptych , circa 1452
Ivory triptych, Scenes from the
Childhood and the Passion of
Christ , Paris, end of 13th-century
God the Geometer , illuminated
manuscript, circa 1220–1230
Albi Cathedral  Roodscreen,
1474–1483
Jean Fouquet , Cruciﬁxion , circa
1452–1460, from an illuminated
manuscript
Chartres Cathedral  stained glass,
south rose window, 1221–1230
Early Modern period
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 10 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Diana the Huntress  - School of
Fontainebleau, 1550–1560
In the late fifteenth century, the French invasion of Italy  and the proximity of the vibrant Burgundy
court, with its Flemish connections, brought the French into contact with the goods, paintings, and
the creative spirit of the Northern  and Italian Renaissance . Initial artistic changes to painting at that
time in France were executed by Flemish artists, such as Jean Clouet  and his son François Clouet
(who was born in France) or the portrait painter Corneille de Lyon , along with the Italians, Rosso
Fiorentino , Francesco Primaticcio , and Niccolò dell'Abbate , the last three constituting what is often
called the first School of Fontainebleau  from 1531. In the Palace of Fontainebleau , one of Francis I
favorite residences, they executed numerous works for the palace's decoration, like the 64-meters
long great gallery adorned with frescos, stuccos and carved wood panellings. Leonardo da Vinci  also
was invited to France by Francis I, but other than the paintings which he brought with him, he
produced little for the French king.
But far from disappearing, Gothic art remained very much in vogue in France during the first third
of the 16th century, particularly in architecture. In many cases, architects and sculptors combined
Gothic  structure  (pointed  arches,  large  stained-glass  windows,  ribbed  vaults)  and  Renaissance
decoration inspired by antiquity in a richly ornamented style that can be considered a continuation
of Flamboyant Gothic. A good example is the church of Saint-Eustache  in Paris.
The art of the period from the 1530s through the reign of Henry IV is often heavily inspired by late Italian pictorial and sculptural
developments commonly referred to as Mannerism , which is associated with the later works of Michelangelo  and Parmigianino ,
among others. It is characterized by figures which are elongated and graceful and rely upon visual rhetoric , including the elaborate
use of allegory  and mythology . Perhaps the greatest accomplishment of the French Renaissance was the construction of the Châteaux
of the Loire Valley , like Azay-le-Rideau , Chambord  and Chenonceau . No longer conceived of as fortresses, such pleasure palaces took
advantage of the richness of the rivers and lands of the Loire region and show remarkable architectural skill - like the Chenonceau
castle, which is built on a bridge across the river Cher.
Some important French architects who adopted the Renaissance style are Pierre Lescot , who rebuilt a part of the Louvre palace  for
the king, Philibert Delorme , who built the Château d'Anet  for Diane de Poitiers, Jean Bullant , who rebuilt the Château d'Écouen  nea
Paris for Anne de Montmorency , and Jacques I Androuet du Cerceau , remembered especially for his suites of engravings of French
châteaux and the perspective views of their gardens which he published in Les plus excellents bastiments de France  (1576, second
volume 1579).
Sculpture  knew  a  great  development  in  France  during  the  Renaissance  and  has  been  better  preserved  than  painting.  Though
Francesco Laurana  worked in France for a short period of time in the late 15th century, it was only in the beginning of the 16th
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 11 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Germain Pilon , Tomb of Valentina Balbiani , 1573
century that the Italian style became prevalent in France, after the Italian Wars
started. In sculpture, the arrival of the Giusto family , who followed Louis XII  in
France in 1504  was instrumental. Later, another major Italian sculptor who was
employed at the court was Benvenuto Cellini , who worked for François Ier from
1540 , and imported the Mannerist style to France (one example being his Nymph
of  Fontainebleau ).  Major  French  sculptors  of  the  time  are  Michel  Colombe ,
responsible for the Tomb of Francis II, Duke of Brittany  in Nantes, who had the
opportunity  to  work  alongside  the  Giusto  brothers.  Along  with  Colombe,  Jean
Goujon  and Germain Pilon  are considered the best French sculptors of the period,
working  in  an  elaborate  Mannerist  style.  Goujon  executed  pure  and  graceful
feminine figures for the Louvre's new decoration. They are elongated, sensual and
fluid while their drapery reveals his knowledge of Greek sculpture, though certainly
not at first hand. Pilon's work - mainly funerary monuments - is imbued with
realism and theatrical emotions and marked by the influence of Michelangelo. Another important figure of the time is Pierre
Bontemps . The Champagne region around Troyes  but also the Loire valley and Normandy were important regional centres for
sculpture. In the Duchy of Lorraine  and Bar, a regional but very talented figure appeared in the person of Ligier Richier .
In the Renaissance, Limoges  became the leading the leading centre for enamel production, with several dynastic workshops, who
often signed or punchmarked their work, like the one of Léonard Limosin  and his descendants. Luxury pieces such as plates, plaques
and ewers were painted with sophisticated Mannerist decoration of pictorial figure scenes, which were surrounded by elaborate
borders. From the 1520s to around the 1550s, Saint-Porchaire ware  was made in the Poitou  region of Western France: very few
example of it have survived. It is characterized by the use of inlays of clay in a different coloured clay. The main body is white, though
covered by a thin cream glaze. There is intensive use of patterns inlaid in brown, reddish-brown or yellow-ochre slips. It might be
called the first high-quality European ceramic style to show an interest in sculptural forms, rather than the decoration in paint of
flattish dish surfaces typical in Hispano-Moresque ware and Italian Renaissance maiolica.
In the second half of the 16th-century, Bernard Palissy , a Protestant humanist who worked for the queen and the king, invented a
very original style of ceramic: he is best known for his so-called "rusticware", typically highly decorated large oval platters featuring
small animals in relief among vegetation, the animals apparently often being moulded from casts taken of dead specimens. In the
19th-century a revival of this style was named Palissy ware  after him.
French Renaissance art
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 12 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Château de Chambord
 François Clouet , Portrait of Pierre
Quthe , 1562
Ceiling of the chapel of the
Château d'Anet
Germain Pilon , Virgin of Sorrows ,
1586
Jean Goujon  and others,
Funerary monument of Louis de
Brezé in Rouen Cathedral , 1536–
1544
Masseot Abaquesne , faience
pavement, 1550
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 13 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Bernard Palissy  (attributed to),
plate, 1575–1600
Cabinet by Hugues Sambin
 Pharsalus gallery of the Château
d'Ancy-le-Franc , 1560s
Master I. C, Limoges enamel
plate, Second half of the 16th-
century
1545  stained glass window in
Saint-Gervais Saint-Protais
church in Gisors
Visitation , 1520  c., Troyes ,
Church of Saint-Jean-au-Marché
The seventeenth century marked a golden age for French art in all fields as the country recovered from its Wars of Religion  and
established itslef as the leading European political power under the reigns of Henry IV , Louis XIII  and Louis XIV . In the early part of
Baroque and Classicism
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 14 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
The abduction of the Sabines  by Nicolas
Poussin, 1634-35.
the seventeenth century, late mannerist  and early Baroque  tendencies continued to flourish
in the court of Marie de Medici  and her son Louis XIII. Art from this period shows influences
from both the north of Europe, namely the Dutch and Flemish schools, and from Roman
painters of the Counter-Reformation . Artists in France frequently debated the contrasting
merits of Peter Paul Rubens  with his Flemish baroque, voluptuous lines and colors to Nicolas
Poussin  with  his  rational  control,  proportion,  Roman  classicist  baroque  style.  Another
proponent of classicism working in Rome was Claude Gellée , known as Le Lorrain, who
defined the form of classical landscape.
Many  young  French  painters  of  the  beginning  of  the  century  went  to  Rome  to  train
themselves and soon assimilated Caravaggio 's influence, for example Valentin de Boulogne
and Simon Vouet . The latter is credited with bringing the baroque in France and at his return
to Paris in 1627 he was named first painter of the king. But French painting soon departed
from the extravagance and naturalism of Italian baroque, and painters such as Eustache Le Sueur  and Laurent de La Hyre , following
Poussin's  example,  developed  a  classicist  way  known  as  Parisian  Atticism ,  inspired  by  Antiquity,  and  focusing  on  proportion,
harmony and the importance of drawing. Even Vouet, after his return from Italy, changed his manner to a more measured but still
highly decorative and elegant style.
But at the same time there was still a strong Caravaggisti  school represented by the amazing candle-lit paintings of Georges de La
Tour , who was mainly active in his native Lorraine  but also worked for a short period of time in Paris. The wretched and the poor
were featured in a quasi-Dutch manner  in the paintings by the three Le Nain  brothers. In the paintings of Philippe de Champaigne
there are both propagandistic portraits of first minister Cardinal Richelieu  and other more contemplative portraits of people in the
Catholic Jansenist  sect.
In architecture, architects such as Salomon de Brosse , who built the Luxembourg Palace  in Paris, François Mansart  and Jacques
Lemercier  helped define the French form of the baroque . They developed the formula of the urban hôtel particulier  that was to
influence all of Europe and strongly departed from the Italian equivalent, the palazzo . Many aristocratic castles were rebuilt in the
new classic-baroque style, some of the most famous being Maisons  by Mansart and Cheverny , characterized by high roofs "à  la
française"  and a form that retained the medieval model of the castle adorned with prominent towers, now converted in elegant
pavilions.
From the mid to late seventeenth century, French art is more often referred to by the term "Classicism" which implies an adherence
to certain rules of proportion and sobriety uncharacteristic of the Baroque, as it was practiced in most of the rest of Europe during
the same period. Under Louis XIV , the Baroque as it was practiced in Italy, was not in French taste, for instance, as Bernini 's famous
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 15 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Georges de La Tour , The
Penitent Magdalene , c. 1640.
Château de Vaux-le-Vicomte  by Louis Le
Vau .
proposal for redesigning the Louvre was rejected by Louis XIV. Through propaganda , wars, and great
architectural works, Louis XIV launched a vast program designed for the glorification of France and
his name. The Palace of Versailles , initially a tiny hunting lodge built by his father, was transformed
by Louis XIV into a marvelous palace for fêtes and parties, under the direction of architects Louis Le
Vau  (who had also built the château de Vaux-le-Vicomte ) and Jules Hardouin Mansart  (who built the
church of the Invalides  in Paris), painter and designer Charles Le Brun , and the landscape architect
André Le Nôtre  who perfected the rational form of the French garden  that from Versailles spread in
all of Europe. In portrait painting, two figures emerged in the 1680s with the portraitists Hyacinthe
Rigaud  and Nicolas de Largillière , whose theatrical yet psychologically refined portraits set a new
model for the 18th century.
French sculpture of the 17th-century moved away from late
Mannerism to a more sophisticated, classical yet grand style
in the 1630s thanks to the likes of Jacques Sarazin , Simon
Guillain  a n d t h e Anguier  brothers .  The  many  châteaux,
hôtels  particuliers,  churches'  altarpieces  and  funerary
monuments that were built over the century meant that the
demand for sculpture was high and many skilled artists flourished. French sculpture also
found its own distinctive way in the pursuit of classicism, particularly during the reign of
Louis XIV, which proved to be a seminal moment for the development of sculpture thanks
to  the  King's  protection  of  artists  such  as  Pierre  Puget  (who  was  also  active  in  Italy),
François Girardon , Antoine Coysevox  and Nicolas Coustou . They all produced sculptures
for the gardens of Versailles and then Marly  and the Invalides , where ambitious decorative
programs involved tens of sculptors, and also extensivly worked for the high nobility. In
Rome, where many young French sculptors were sent to study Antiquity and the Renaissance, Pierre Legros the Younger , working in
a more baroque manner, was one of the most influential sculptors of the end of the century alongside Pierre-Étienne Monnot .
Outside of Paris and other major centers, the 17th-century saw significant activity in the redecoration of religious buildings in the
provinces,  with  the  creation  of  countless  elaborate  altarpieces  and  reredos  in  stone  or  wood—works,  combining  architecture,
painting, and sculpture. They were produced by local workshops in a style decidedly more Baroque and decorative than the one in
vogue at court. Some of these workshops enjoyed great success over several generations and developed vernacular styles that spread
throughout various regions. This was the case with the altarpiece makers of Laval , a town near which black and red marble quarries
were discovered, and whose style spread to the provinces of Maine, Anjou, Tourraine and eastern Brittany, with artists such as Pierre
Corbineau  and Tugal Caris , who were often both architects and sculptors. In western Brittany, local artists developed a different
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 16 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
François Anguier , The battle of Senlis ,
1661-1663, bronze relief from the Funerary
monument of Henri I of Longueville .
genre,  based  on  very  elaborate  and  highly  carved  wooden  and  painted  altars.  In  southern  France,  dynasties  of  sculptors  and
architects were very active in the Pyrenees , with the Ferrère dynasty of altarpiece makers for instance, and in Provence  where highly-
trained sculptors like Christophe Veyrier  or the members of the Péru familiy in Avignon were active, building palaces, churches,
fountains and altarpieces alike.
The  17th-century  also  saw  an  important  renewal  in  printmaking,  France  (especially
Paris and the Duchy of Lorraine) becoming one of the main centers for engraving and
etching. At the beginning of the century, Jacques Bellange  worked in Lorraine with a
refined  style  still  influenced  by  mannerism,  producing  expressive  etchings  full  of
emotion  intricated  with  a  feminine  elegance.  Another  of  the  main  engravers  of  the
period was also from Lorraine: Jacques Callot . He made important technical advances
to printmaking, developing the échoppe , a type of etching-needle with a slanting oval
section at the end, which enabled etchers to create a swelling line, as engravers were
able to do. He produced more than 1,400 etchings that chronicled the life of his period,
featuring soldiers, clowns, drunkards, Romani, beggars, as well as court life, like in his
series  The  Miseries  and  Misfortunes  of  War  (1632–33).  One  of  Callot's  devotees,
Abraham Bosse , was active in Paris. He spread Callot's innovations all over Europe with
the first published manual of etching. His combination of very carefully depicted grand
interiors with relatively trivial domestic subjects was original and highly influential on French art. Also based in Paris, Claude Mellan
was known for the technical virtuosity of his prints, thanks to an idiosyncratic technique, in which, instead of creating shade by cross-
hatching, he used a system of parallel lines - a famous example being his Face of Christ  (1649), created from a single spiralling line
that starts at the tip of Jesus' nose. Finally, in the second half of the century emerged Robert Nanteuil , considered the undisputed
master of French portrait engraving.
In the decorative arts, France pursued a state-impulsed policy favouring new state-owned or supervised factories to rival Italian,
Flemish and Dutch productions: Nevers  and Rouen  faience factories, though private, were first granted royal monopolies in 1603  and
1647  respectively. They produced fine earthenware inspired from Italian and Asiatic styles and under Louis XIV worked extensively
for the French crown. The Gobelins Manufactory  in Paris, founded in 1601  with the support of Henry IV , was purchased by minister
Jean-Baptiste Colbert  on behalf of the French crown in 1662  and reorganized. It soon produced the most refined tapestries of
Europe, while France also became the foremost European center for cabinetmaking and furniture production thanks to the ébénistes
André-Charles Boulle  (who invented the Boulle work  style of furnituremaking, an inlay of tortoiseshell, brass and pewter into ebony)
and Pierre Gole , who helped establish the fashionable Louis XIV style .
17th-century French art
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 17 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
François Girardon , Apollo served
by the Nymphs , 1667 - 1675
Simon Vouet , Venus and Adonis ,
c. 1642
Claude Lefèbvre , Portrait of Jean-
Baptiste Colbert , 1666
Jacques Stella , Solomon
Worshipping Idols , 1647
Jean Baptiste de Champaigne
and Nicolas de Plattemontagne ,
Double Portrait of both Artists ,
1654
André-Charles Boulle ,
marqueterie cabinet, c.
1670 - 1675
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 18 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Gobelins Manufactory , Tenture
des Mois ou des Maisons
Royales, the month of April ,
1668 - 1683 , designed by Charles
Le Brun
Nevers faience , Pair of wine jugs,
c. 1685 , depicting François
Chauveau 's Rape of Europa
Rococo  and Neoclassicism  are terms used to describe the visual and plastic arts and architecture in Europe from the early eighteenth
century to the end of the eighteenth century. In France, the death of Louis XIV  in 1715 led to a period of freedom commonly called
the Régence . Versailles was abandoned from 1715 to 1722, the young king Louis XV  and the government led by the duke of Orléans
residing in Paris. There a new style emerged in the decorative arts, known as rocaille  : the asymmetry and dynamism of the baroque
was kept but renewed in a style that is less rhetoric and with less pompous effects, a deeper research of artificiality and use of motifs
inspired by nature. This manner used to decorate rooms and furniture also existed in painting. Rocaille painting turned toward
lighter subjects, such as the fêtes galantes , theater settings, pleasant mythological narratives and the female nude. Most of the time
the moralising sides of myths or history paintings are omitted and the accent is put on the decorative and pleasant aspect of the
scenes depicted. Paintings from the period show an emphasis more on color than drawing, with apparent brush strokes and very
colorful scenes, reflecting the debates in the Royal Academy of painting, ultimately won by the Rubenists faction at the start of the
century. Important French painters from this period include Antoine Watteau , considered the inventor of the fête galante , Nicolas
Lancret  and François Boucher , known for his gentle pastoral and galant scenes (especially his pastorales ), and Jean-Marc Nattier ,
admired  for  its  graceful  and  charming  oil  portraits  of  ladies  at  Louis  XV's  court.  Pastel  portrait  painting  became  particularly
fashionable in Europe at the time and France was the major center of activity for pastellists, with the prominent figures of Maurice
Rococo and Neoclassicism
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 19 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Boiseries of the Salon de la princesse  by
Germain Boffrand , hôtel de Soubise ,
Paris
Prometheus  by Nicolas-
Sébastien Adam , 1762
Quentin de La Tour , Jean-Baptiste Perronneau  and the Swiss Jean-Étienne Liotard . Other
important artists in the genre of history painting during the first half of the century were
François Lemoyne  (who painted the vault of the Salon d'Hercule  in the palace of Versailles),
Jean-François de Troy , Carle Van Loo  and Charles-Joseph Natoire .
The Louis XV style  of decoration, although already apparent
at the end of the last reign, was lighter with pastel colors,
elaborate  wood  panels,  smaller  rooms,  less  gilding,  and
fewer  brocades;  shells,  garlands,  and  occasional  Chinese
subjects predominated. The Chantilly , Vincennes  and then
Sèvres manufacturers  produced some of the finest porcelain
of the time. In the second half of the century the Limoges
manufacture , established in 1771, was the first in France to
produce hard-paste porcelain. The highly skilled ébénistes ,
cabinet-makers  mostly  based  in  Paris,  created  elaborate
pieces  of  furniture  with  precious  wood  and  bronze
ornaments that were to be highly praised and imitated in all
of Europe. The most famous are Jean-François Oeben , who
created  the  work  desk  of  king  Louis  XV  in  Versailles,
Bernard II van Risamburgh , Jean-Henri Riesener , Martin
Carlin  and  the  chair-makers  Georges  Jacob  a n d Jean-
Baptiste-Claude  Sené . H i g h l y s k i l l e d a r t i s t s , c a l l e d t h e ciseleur-doreurs , s p e c i a l i z e d i n b r o n z e
ornaments for furniture and other pieces of decorative arts - the most famous being Pierre Gouthière  and Pierre-Philippe Thomire .
Talented silversmiths such as Thomas Germain  and his son François-Thomas Germain  created elaborate silverware services that
were highly praised by the various royalties of Europe. Rooms in châteaux  and hôtels particuliers  were more intimate than during
the reign of Louis XIV and were decorated with rocaille style boiseries  (carved wood panels covering the walls of a room) conceived
by architects such as Germain Boffrand  and Gilles-Marie Oppenord  or ornemanistes  (designers of decorative objects) such as Juste-
Aurèle Meissonnier .
The most prominent architects of the first half of the century were, apart Boffrand, Robert de Cotte  and Ange-Jacques Gabriel , who
designed public squares such as the place de la Concorde  in Paris and the place de la Bourse  in Bordeaux  in a style consciously
inspired by that of the era of Louis XIV. During the first half of the century, France replaced Italy as the artistic centre and main
artistic influence in Europe and many French artists worked in other courts across the continent (like the painters Pierre Subleyras
for Pope Benedict XIV  in Rome, Antoine Pesne  for the king of Prussia in Berlin, Jean Ranc  and Louis-Michel van Loo  for the king of
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 20 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Place de la Bourse  in Bordeaux by Ange-
Jacques Gabriel
Spain in Madrid, Philippe Jacques de Loutherbourg  in London, the sculptors Étienne
Maurice  Falconet  for  Catherine  the  Great  in  Saint  Petersburg  and  Louis-François
Roubiliac  in London or the ironworker Jean Tijou  in England).
The most prominent sculptors of the first half of the century were Guillaume Coustou the
Elder , famous for his last royal commission, the Marly Horses  (1743–1745), and his son
Guillaume Coustou the Younger , Robert Le Lorrain , celebrated for his Sun Horses  relief in
the Hôtel de Rohan  in Paris (1737), and Edmé Bouchardon , a precursor of neoclassicism,
whose main public commission was the Fontaine des Quatre-Saisons  (1739-1745) in Paris.
He was also renowned for his marble busts of members of the high-nobility, reminiscent
of the Antique.
1700-1750 French art
Antoine Watteau , The
Embarkation for Cythera , 1718.
François Boucher , The Afternoon
Meal , 1739.
François Lemoyne , painted
ceiling of the Salon d'Hercule ,
Palace of Versailles, 1733-1736.
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 21 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Jean Siméon Chardin , Soap
bubbles , 1733-1735.
Juste-Aurèle Meissonnier ,
Covered Tureen on Stand ( Pot-à-
oille couvert ), 1735-1738.
Bernard II van Risamburgh ,
Commode, c. 1740–45.
Jean-Baptiste Oudry , Still life with
three dead birds, redcurrants,
cherries and insects , 1712.
Guillaume Coustou the Younger
and Pierre Vernet, Main altar of
Saint-Saint-Paul-Saint-François-
Xavier church in Bordeaux ,
1741-1748.
The Pavillon Français  in the
Palace of Versailles by Ange-
Jacques Gabriel , 1750.
In the second half of the century the leading French sculptors were the portraitist Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne , known for his expressive
portrait busts, both im marble and terracotta, which captured the passing nuances of expression and gave a sense of movement,
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 22 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Inspiration  by Jean-Honoré Fragonard ,
1769
Jean-Baptiste Pigalle , celebrated for his impressive funerary monument of Maurice de Saxe  in Strasbourg (1753-1765) and his naked
statue of Voltaire portrayed as an antique philosopher (1776), Étienne Maurice Falconet , who created the monumental Bronze
Horseman  equestrian monument in Saint Petersburg for Catherine the Great (1768–1782), and Clodion , known for his delicate and
intimate terracotta reliefs.
In the later part of the reign of Louis XV, sculptors began to give greater attention to the faces
and give way to the principles of neoclassicism. The leaders of this new style were Jean-
Antoine Houdon , noted for his busts of celebrated authors and statesmen and his bronzes
with clean lines, combining the elongation of the body reminiscent of Mannerism with the
colder rigor of Neoclassicism (like in his allegory of Winter ), Augustin Pajou  and Pierre
Julien .
The latter half of the eighteenth century continued to see French preeminence in Europe,
particularly through the arts and sciences, and speaking the French language  was expected
for members of the European courts. The French academic system continued to produce
artists,  but  some,  such  as  Jean-Honoré  Fragonard  a n d Jean-Baptiste-Siméon  Chardin ,
explored  new  and  increasingly  impressionist  styles  of  painting  with  thick  brushwork.
Although  the  hierarchy  of  genres  continued  to  be  respected  officially,  genre  painting ,
landscape , portrait , a n d still  life  were  extremely  fashionable.  Chardin  and  Jean-Baptiste
Oudry  were hailed for their still lifes although this was officially considered the lowest of all
genres in the hierarchy of painting subjects.
One also finds in this period a Pre-romanticist  aspect. Hubert Robert 's  images  of  ruins,
inspired by Italian capriccio  paintings, are typical in this respect as well as the image of
storms and moonlight marines by Claude Joseph Vernet  and the allegorical nudes of Pierre-
Paul Prud'hon , who adopted a vaporous touch inspired by Leonardo da Vinci and Correggio, testifying to the emergence of a
romantic sensibility in opposition to the rigor of the neoclassical line. So too the change from the rational and geometrical French
garden  of André Le Nôtre  to the English garden , which emphasized artificially wild and irrational nature, like in the garden made by
Richard Mique  for Marie-Antoinette on the grounds of the Petit Trianon , in Versailles, which includes an artificial lake, hill and
grotto. One also finds in some of these gardens—curious ruins of temples—called "follies", like the neo-antique Temple de l'Amour ,
also in the Petit Trianon's gardens.
The last half of the eighteenth century saw a turn to Neoclassicism  in France, that is to say a conscious use of Greek and Roman
forms and iconography . This movement was promoted by intellectuals such as Diderot, in reaction to the artificiality and the
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 23 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Jacques-Louis David , Oath of the Horatii ,
1786
decorative essence of the rocaille  style. In painting, the greatest representative of this style is
Jacques-Louis David , who, mirroring the profiles of Greek vases, emphasized the use of the
profile. His subject matter often involved classical history such as the death of Socrates and
Brutus. The dignity and subject matter of his paintings were greatly inspired by the works of
Nicolas  Poussin  from  the  seventeenth  century.  Poussin  and  David  were  in  turn  major
influences on Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres , who started his career in the very last year of
the century. Other important neoclassical painters of the period are Jean-Baptiste Greuze ,
celebrated for his moralizing genre painting, Joseph-Marie Vien  and, in the portrait genre,
Élisabeth  Louise  Vigée  Le  Brun ,  who  was  a  favorite  of  Marie-Antoinette.  Louis-Léopold
Boilly  became active at the end of 1770s and painted genre paintings documenting French
middle-class social life and the French Revolution, small portraits and trompe-l'oeil in a style
of great precision and meticulousness. Neoclassicism also penetrated decorative arts and
architecture.
Architects such as Ledoux  and Boullée  developed a radical style of neoclassical architecture based on simple and pure geometrical
forms with a research of symmetry and harmony, elaborating visionary projects, for example the complex of the Saltworks of Arc-et-
Senans  by Ledoux, a model of an ideal factory developed from the rational concepts of the Enlightenment  thinkers.
1750-1800 French art
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 24 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Élisabeth Vigée Le Brun , The
Baronne de Crussol , 1785.
The Boudoir de la Reine  by Pierre
Rousseau with Riesener 's
Cylinder Secretary of Marie-
Antoinette, Palace of
Fontainebleau , 1786.
Sèvres Porcelain Manufactory ,
Pot-pourri vase in the shape of a
ship  ( Vase potpourri à vaisseau ),
1764.
Augustin Pajou , Jean-Baptiste
Lepaute  and Étienne Martincourt,
Mantel clock, 1780-1790.
Neptune Fountain by Barthélemy
Guibal  with ironwork by Jean
Lamour, Place Stanislas , Nancy,
1751-1755.
Christophe-Gabriel Allegrain ,
Diana , 1777-1778.
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 25 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Jacques-Louis David , The Death
of Marat , 1793.
Director's house at the Royal
Saltworks at Arc-et-Senans  by
Claude Nicolas Ledoux  (1775–
79).
Hubert Robert , Project for the
Transformation of the Grande
Galerie du Louvre , 1796.
The French Revolution  and the Napoleonic Wars  brought great changes to the arts in France. The program of exaltation and myth
making attendant to the Emperor Napoleon  was closely coordinated in the paintings of David, Gros and Guérin. In architecture and
decorative arts, the Empire style  was created for imperial residences by architects Pierre Fontaine  and Charles Percier ,  drawing
heavily on references to Roman and Egyptian Antiquity. Cabinet-maker Jacob Desmalter  created original furniture in the Empire
style, mainly employing mahogany veneers with heavy gilt-bronze mounts. Seats, made in mahogany when they were not painted or
gilded, were inspired from seats and thrones designs of Antiquity, derived from details on ancient reliefs and Greek vases. Jean-
Auguste-Dominique Ingres  was the main figure of neoclassicism in painting until the 1850s and a prominent teacher, giving priority
to drawing over color. Meanwhile, Orientalism , Egyptian motifs, the tragic anti-hero , the wild landscape, the historical novel , and
scenes from the Middle Ages and the Renaissance—all these elements of Romanticism —created a vibrant period that defies easy
classification. The most important romantic painter of the period was Eugène Delacroix , who had a successful public career and was
the main opponent of Ingres. Before him, Théodore Géricault  opened the path to romanticism with his monumental Raft of the
Medusa  exposed at the Salon of 1819 . Camille Corot  tried to escape the conventional and idealized form of landscape painting
Modern period
19th century
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 26 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
The Massacre at Chios , Eugène
Delacroix, 1824
Claude Monet , Rouen
Cathedral, Facade (Sunset) ,
c. 1892-1894
influenced by classicism to be more realist and sensible to atmospheric variations at the same time.
Romantic  tendencies  continued  throughout  the  century,  both  idealized  landscape  painting  and
Realism  have their seeds in Romanticism. The work of Gustave Courbet  and the Barbizon school  are
logical  developments  from  it,  as  is  the  late  nineteenth  century  Symbolism  of  such  painters  as
Gustave Moreau , the professor of Henri Matisse  and Georges Rouault , as well as Odilon Redon .
Academic painting  developed at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts  was the most successful with the public
and  the  state:  highly  trained  painters  such  as  Jean-Léon  Gérôme , William  Bouguereau  a n d
Alexandre Cabanel  painted  historical  scenes  inspired  by  the  antique,  following  the  footsteps  of
Ingres and the neoclassics. Though criticized for their conventionalism by the young avant-garde
painters  and  critics,  the  most  talented  of  the  Academic  painters  renewed  the  historical  genre,
drawing inspiration from multiple cultures and techniques such as the Orient, and the new framings
made possible by the invention of photography
For many critics who wrote about the nineteenth century and the idea
of modernity, Édouard Manet  is the main figure leading to the rise of
an  avant-garde  movement  as  opposed  to  Academism  and  official  painting  (as  much  as  Charles
Baudelaire  is for poetry at the same time). His rediscovery of Spanish painting from the Golden age, his
willingness to show the unpainted canvas, his exploration of the forthright nude, and his radical brush
strokes are the first steps toward Impressionism. Impressionism  would take the Barbizon school  one
step farther, rejecting once and for all a belabored style and the use of mixed colors and black, for fragile
transitive effects of light as captured outdoors in changing light (partly inspired by the paintings of J. M.
W. Turner  and Eugène Boudin ). It led to Claude Monet  with his cathedrals and haystacks, Pierre-
Auguste Renoir  with both his early outdoor festivals and his later feathery style of ruddy nudes, and
Edgar Degas  with his dancers and bathers. Other important impressionists were Frédéric Bazille , Alfred
Sisley , Camille Pissarro  and Gustave Caillebotte .
After that threshold was crossed, the next thirty years became a litany of amazing experiments. Vincent
van  Gogh ,  Dutch  born,  but  living  in  France,  opened  the  road  to  expressionism . Georges  Seurat ,
influenced by color theory, devised a pointillist  technique that governed the Impressionist experiment
and was followed by Paul Signac . Paul Cézanne , a painter's painter, attempted a geometrical exploration
of the world, that left many of his peers indifferent. Paul Gauguin , a banker, found symbolism in
Brittany  along with Émile Bernard , and then exoticism and primitivism in French Polynesia . These painters were referred to as Post-
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 27 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Impressionists . Les Nabis , a movement of the 1890s, including painters such as Paul Sérusier , Pierre Bonnard , Édouard Vuillard  and
Maurice Denis , was influenced by Gauguin's example in Brittany: they explored a decorative art in flat plains with the graphic
approach of a Japanese print. They preached that a work of art is the end product and the visual expression of an artist's synthesis of
nature in personal aesthetic metaphors and symbols. Henri Rousseau , the self-taught dabbling postmaster, became the model for the
naïve revolution.
19th-century French painting
Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres ,
The Valpinçon Bather , 1808.
Théodore Géricault , The Raft of
the Medusa , 1818-1819.
Eugène Delacroix , Liberty
Leading the People , 1830.
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 28 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Édouard Manet , Olympia , 1863.
 Georges Seurat , A Sunday
Afternoon on the Island of La
Grande Jatte , 1884-1886.
Edgar Degas , After the Bath,
Woman Drying her Neck ,
1895-1898.
Paul Cézanne , Still Life with Milk
Jug and Fruit , c. 1890.
Paul Gauguin , The Yellow Christ ,
1889.
Auguste Rodin , The Gates of
Hell , 1880-1917.
The early years of the twentieth century were dominated by experiments in colour and content that Impressionism  and Post-
Impressionism  had unleashed. The products of the far east also brought new influences. At roughly the same time, Les Fauves  ( Henri
20th century
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 29 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Henri Matisse , Dance (I) , 1909.
Georges Braque , Violin and
Candlestick , 1910
Matisse , André Derain , Maurice de Vlaminck , Albert Marquet , Raoul Dufy , Othon Friesz , Charles
Camoin , Henri Manguin ) exploded into color, much like German Expressionism .
The discovery of African tribal masks by Pablo Picasso , a Spaniard living in Paris, lead him to
create his Les Demoiselles d'Avignon  of 1907. Working independently, Picasso and Georges
Braque  returned to and refined Cézanne's way of rationally comprehension of objects in a flat
medium, their experiments in cubism  also would lead them to integrate all aspects and objects of
day-to-day life, collage  of newspapers, musical instruments, cigarettes, wine, and other objects
into their works. Cubism  in all its phases would dominate paintings of Europe and America for
the next ten years. (See the article on Cubism  for a complete discussion.)
World War I  did not stop the dynamic creation of art in France. In 1916 a group of discontents met in a bar in Zurich, the Cabaret
Voltaire , and created the most radical gesture possible, the anti-art of Dada . At the same time, Francis Picabia  and Marcel Duchamp
were exploring similar notions. At a 1917 art show in New York , Duchamp presented a white porcelain urinal ( Fountain ) signed R.
Mutt  as work of art, becoming the father of the readymade .
When Dada  reached Paris, it was avidly embraced by a group of young artists and writers who were
fascinated with the writings of Sigmund Freud , particularly by his notion of the unconscious mind . The
provocative spirit of Dada became linked to the exploration of the unconscious mind through the use of
automatic writing , chance operations, and, in some cases, altered states. The surrealists  quickly turned
to  painting  and  sculpture.  The  shock  of  unexpected  elements,  the  use  of  Frottage , collage , a n d
decalcomania , the rendering of mysterious landscapes and dreamed images were to become the key
techniques through the rest of the 1930s.
Immediately after this war the French art scene diverged roughly in two directions. There were those
who continued in the artistic experiments from before the war, especially surrealism, and others who
adopted the new Abstract Expressionism  and action painting  from New York, executing them in a
French manner using Tachism  or L'art informel . Parallel to both of these tendencies, Jean Dubuffet
dominated the early post-war years while exploring childlike drawings, graffiti, and cartoons in a variety
of media.
Between the two world wars, an art movement known as the École de Paris  (School Of Paris), flourished. Centered in Paris, the
movement gave rise to a unique form of Expressionist Art . It included many foreign and French artists, many of whom were Jewish ;
École de Paris
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 30 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
André Warnod , Les Berceaux
de la jeune peinture, sketch
by Modigliani
these artists were primarily centered in Montparnasse .
[ 12 ]
 These Jewish artists played a significant role
in the École de Paris, several had sought refuge in Paris from Eastern Europe escaping persecution and
pogroms.
[ 13 ]
 Prominent  figures  such  as  Marc  Chagall , Jules  Pascin , Chaïm  Soutine , Isaac  Frenkel
Frenel , Amedeo  Modigliani , a n d Abraham  Mintchine  were  among  notable  contributors  to  the
movement in France and abroad.
[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ]
 These artists often depicted Jewish themes in their work,
imbuing it with intense emotional tones.
[ 17 ]
The term "l’ École de Paris ," coined in 1925 to counter xenophobia , acknowledged the foreign, often
Jewish,  artists.  However,  the  Nazi  occupation  led  to  the  tragic  loss  of  Jewish  artists  during  the
Holocaust , resulting in the decline of the School of Paris as some artists left or fled to Israel  or the
United States .
[ 13 ] [ 18 ] [ 14 ] [ 12 ]
In the 1940s, abstract painting gained momentum and critical recognition after World War II  with the
Abstraction lyrique  or Tachisme , the French versions of informal art . Its main representants were Jean
Fautrier , Pierre Soulages , Jean Dubuffet , Nicolas de Staël  and Georges Mathieu . By the 1950s Paris was
again the main European artistic capital, drawing painters from all over the world, like Hans Hartung , Serge Poliakoff , Gérard
Schneider , Simon Hantaï  and Zao Wou-Ki . The late 1950s and early 1960s in France saw art forms that might be considered Pop Art .
Yves Klein  had attractive nude women roll around in blue paint and throw themselves at canvases while Martial Raysse  incorporated
photography, adverts and collage in his works. Affichistes  like Raymond Hains  and Jacques Villeglé  practiced Décollage , images
created by ripping and tearing away or otherwise removing pieces of an original image.
The Romanian-born Victor Vasarely  invented Op-Art  by designing sophisticated optical patterns while the eleven artists regrouped in
the collective Groupe de Recherche d'Art Visuel , like François Morellet  and Julio Le Parc , investigated a wide spectrum of kinetic art
and op art optical effects by using various types of artificial light and mechanical movement. Artists of the Fluxus  movement such as
Ben Vautier  incorporated graffiti  and found objects into their work. Niki de Saint Phalle  created bloated and vibrant plastic figures.
The Nouveaux Réalistes  group incorportaed real objects from everyday life in their work: Arman  gathered together found objects in
boxed or resin-coated assemblages, and César Baldaccini  produced a series of large compressed object-sculptures. César created
large waste sculptures by compressing discarded materials, for instance, automobiles, metal, rubbish, and domestic objects.
[ 19 ]
Pop Art painting arrived in France in the early 1960s and was known as Figuration narrative , a more politically engaged version than
its American counterpart. Some of its main tenants were Hervé Télémaque , Gérard Fromanger , Bernard Rancillac  and Jacques
Monory .
Post War
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 31 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Musée du Louvre
Musée d'Orsay
In May 1968, the radical youth movement, through their atelier populaire , produced a great deal of poster-art protesting the
moribund policies of president Charles de Gaulle .
Many contemporary artists continue to be haunted by the horrors of the Second World War and the specter of the Holocaust.
Christian Boltanski 's harrowing installations of the lost and the anonymous are particularly powerful.
▪ Musée du Louvre
▪ Musée d'Orsay
▪ Musée National d'Art Moderne
▪ Musée de Cluny
▪ Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris
▪ Petit Palais
▪ Musée Picasso
▪ Musée Rodin
▪ Musée de l'Orangerie
▪ Musée Zadkine
▪ Musée Maillol
▪ Musée Bourdelle
▪ Musée Gustave Moreau
▪ Musée Jacquemart-André
▪ Musée national Eugène Delacroix
▪ Musée national Jean-Jacques Henner
▪ Musée Marmottan Monet
▪ Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris
▪ Musée Nissim de Camondo
French and Western Art museums of France
In Paris
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 32 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Palais des Beaux-Arts de Lille
▪ Musée Cognacq-Jay
▪ Musée Carnavalet
▪ Musée Condé  in Chantilly
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Chartres  in Chartres
▪ Musée de la Renaissance  in Écouen
▪ Musée d'archéologie nationale  in Saint-Germain-en-Laye
▪ Musée départemental Maurice Denis "The Priory"  in Saint-Germain-en-Laye
▪ Musée d'art et d'archéologie de Senlis  in Senlis
▪ Sèvres - Musée de la céramique  in Sèvres
(alphabetically by city)
▪ Musée Faure  in Aix-les-Bains
▪ Musée Granet  in Aix-en-Provence
▪ Musée Toulouse-Lautrec  in Albi
▪ Musée de Picardie  in Amiens
▪ Musée de l'Arles et de la Provence antiques  in Arles
▪ Musée du Petit Palais  in Avignon
▪ Fondation Calvet  in Avignon
▪ Musée Albert-André  in Bagnols-sur-Cèze
▪ Musée Bonnat  in Bayonne
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts et d'archéologie de Besançon  in Besançon
▪ Musée Fernand Léger  in Biot, Alpes-Maritimes
▪ Musée des beaux-arts de Bordeaux  in Bordeaux
Near Paris
Outside Paris
Major museums
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 33 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Musée des beaux-arts de Lyon
Musée des Beaux-Arts de Nancy
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Caen  in Caen
▪ Goya Museum  in Castres
▪ Musée d'Art Moderne de Céret  in Céret
▪ Musée d'art Roger-Quilliot  in Clermont-Ferrand
▪ Unterlinden Museum  in Colmar
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Dijon  in Dijon
▪ Musée départemental d'Art ancien et contemporain  in Épinal
▪ Jacquemart-André museum  in Fontaine-Chaalis
▪ Musée de Grenoble  in Grenoble
▪ Grenoble Archaeological Museum  in Grenoble
▪ Musée Matisse  in Le Cateau-Cambrésis
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts André-Malraux  in Le Havre
▪ Palais des Beaux-Arts de Lille  in Lille
▪ Musée des beaux-arts de Lyon  in Lyon
▪ Musée gallo-romain  in Lyon
▪ Musée des beaux-arts de Marseille  in Marseille
▪ Musée Cantini  in Marseille
▪ Museums of Metz  in Metz
▪ Centre Pompidou-Metz  in Metz
▪ Musée Ingres  in Montauban
▪ Musée Fabre  in Montpellier
▪ Château de Montsoreau-Museum of Contemporary Art  in Montsoreau
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Nancy  in Nancy
▪ Musée de l'École de Nancy  in Nancy
▪ Musée Lorrain  in Nancy
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Nantes  in Nantes
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts  in Nice
▪ Musée national Message Biblique Marc Chagall  in Nice
▪ Musée archéologique de Nîmes  in Nîmes
▪ Musée Camille Claudel  in Nogent-sur-Seine
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 34 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
Musée des Beaux-Arts de Rouen
Palais Rohan, Strasbourg  and Musée de
l’Œuvre Notre-Dame  (on the right)
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Reims  in Reims
▪ Palais du Tau  in Reims
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Rennes  in Rennes
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Rouen  in Rouen
▪ Musée d'art moderne de Saint-Étienne  in Saint-Étienne
▪ Fondation Maeght  in Saint-Paul, Alpes-Maritimes
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Strasbourg  in Strasbourg
▪ Musée d'art moderne et contemporain of Strasbourg  in Strasbourg
▪ Musée de l’Œuvre Notre-Dame  in Strasbourg
▪ Musée des Arts décoratifs, Strasbourg  in Strasbourg
▪ Musée des Augustins  in Toulouse
▪ Musée Saint-Raymond  in Toulouse
▪ Fondation Bemberg  in Toulouse
(alphabetically by city)
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Brest  in Brest
▪ Musée Théodore Deck et des pays du Florival  in Guebwiller
▪ Musée historique de Haguenau  in Haguenau
▪ Musée Eugène Boudin  in Honﬂeur
▪ Musée Crozatier  in Le Puy-en-Velay
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Libourne  in Libourne
▪ Musée Girodet  in Montargis
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Mulhouse  in Mulhouse
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Nîmes  in Nîmes
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Pau  in Pau
▪ Musée Hyacinthe Rigaud  in Perpignan
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Pont-Aven  in Pont-Aven
▪ La Piscine Museum  in Roubaix
Other museums
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 35 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
▪ Musée Paul-Dupuy  in Toulouse
▪ Musée des Beaux-Arts de Valenciennes  in Valenciennes
(alphabetically by city)
▪ Musée des tapisseries  in Aix-en-Provence
▪ Château d'Angers  in Angers
▪ Musée de la tapisserie de Bayeux  in Bayeux
▪ Musée des Tissus et des Arts décoratifs  in Lyon
▪ Musée de l'impression sur étoffes  in Mulhouse
▪ Musée Galliera  in Paris
▪ Gobelins Manufactory  in Paris
▪ Musée du papier peint  in Rixheim
French words and expressions dealing with the arts:
▪ peintre  — painter
▪ peinture à l'huile  — oil painting
▪ tableau  — painting
▪ toile  — canvas
▪ gravure  — print
▪ dessin  — drawing
▪ aquarelle  — watercolor
▪ croquis  — sketch
▪ ébauche  — draft
▪ crayon  — pencil
▪ paysage  — landscape
Textile and tapestry museums
Vocabulary
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 36 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
▪ nature morte  — still life
▪ la peinture d'histoire  — History painting , see Hierarchy of genres
▪ tapisserie  – tapestry
▪ vitrail  – stained glass
▪ List of French artists
▪ For information about French literature, see: French literature
▪ For information about French history, see: History of France
▪ For other topics on French culture, see: French culture
▪ Anthony Blunt : Art and Architecture in France 1500–1700 . ISBN   0-300-05314-2 .
▪ André Chastel. French Art Vol I: Prehistory to the Middle Ages . ISBN   2-08-013566-X .
▪ André Chastel. French Art Vol II: The Renaissance . ISBN   2-08-013583-X .
▪ André Chastel. French Art Vol III: The Ancient Régime . ISBN   2-08-013617-8 .
▪ French Art at the Saint Louis Art Museum  ( https://frenchart.umsl.edu/ )
Specific
1. carolinarh (2015-10-10). "French Romanesque I:
Architecture"  ( https://arsartisticadventureofmankind.wordpres
s.com/2015/10/10/french-romanesque-i-architecture/ ) . The
Artistic Adventure of Mankind . Retrieved 2023-12-30 .
2. Rudolph, Conrad, ed. (1 January 2006). A Companion to
Medieval Art: Romanesque and Gothic in Northern Europe  ( h
ttps://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/book/10.1002/978047099699
7#page=317 ) . doi : 10.1002/9780470996997  ( https://doi.org/1
0.1002%2F9780470996997 ) . ISBN   978-0-470-99699-7 .
3. Onians, John, ed. (2004). Atlas of World Art . p. 186-187.
ISBN   9781856693776 .
4. Tate. "Impressionism"  ( https://www.tate.org.uk/art/art-terms/i/i
mpressionism ) . Tate . Retrieved 2023-12-30 .
5. "School of Paris"  ( https://www.nationalgalleries.org/art-and-ar
tists/glossary-terms/school-paris ) . www.nationalgalleries.org .
Retrieved 2023-12-30 .
6. Rewald, Authors: Sabine (October 2004). "Fauvism | Essay |
The Metropolitan Museum of Art | Heilbrunn Timeline of Art
History"  ( https://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/fauv/hd_fauv.h
tm ) . The Met’s Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History . Retrieved
2023-12-30 .
See also
References and further reading
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 37 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
7. Rewald, Authors: Sabine (October 2004). "Cubism | Essay |
The Metropolitan Museum of Art | Heilbrunn Timeline of Art
History"  ( https://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/cube/hd_cub
e.htm ) . The Met’s Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History . Retrieved
2023-12-30 .
8. Benjamin, Walter (1969). "Paris: Capital of the Nineteenth
Century"  ( https://www.jstor.org/stable/1566965 ) . Perspecta .
12 : 165– 172. doi : 10.2307/1566965  ( https://doi.org/10.230
7%2F1566965 ) . ISSN 0079-0958  ( https://search.worldcat.or
g/issn/0079-0958 ) . JSTOR   1566965  ( https://www.jstor.org/sta
ble/1566965 ) .
9. HIGONNET, Patrice L. R. (2009-06-30). Paris: Capital of the
World  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=X-E7P9dVSbgC&
dq=paris+art+world+capital&pg=PP8 ) . Harvard University
Press. ISBN 978-0-674-03864-6 .
10. Stokstad (2005), 540.
11. Stokstad (2005), 541.
12. "Paris School of Art | Encyclopedia.com"  ( https://www.encycl
opedia.com/religion/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-
maps/paris-school-art ) . www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved
2023-11-19 .
13. "The Jewish painters of l'École de Paris-from the Holocaust
to today"  ( https://k-larevue.com/en/the-jewish-painters-of-leco
le-de-paris-from-the-holocaust-to-today/ ) . Jews, Europe, the
XXIst century . 2021-11-25 . Retrieved 2023-11-19 . " " l'École
de Paris is a term coined by the art critic André Warnod in
1925, in the magazine Comœdia, to deﬁne the group formed
by foreign painters in Paris. The École de Paris does not
designate a movement or a school in the academic sense of
the term, but a historical fact. In Warnod's mind, this term
was intended to counter a latent xenophobia rather than to
establish a theoretical approach. "
14. Nieszawer, Nadine (2020). Histoire des Artistes Juifs de
l'École de Paris: Stories of Jewish Artists of the School of
Paris  (in French). France. ISBN   979-8633355567 .
15. "Alexandre FRENEL"  ( https://ecoledeparis.org/alexandre-fren
el/ ) . Bureau d’art Ecole de Paris . 2019-01-02 . Retrieved
2023-11-19 .
16. "Marc CHAGALL"  ( https://ecoledeparis.org/marc-chagall/ ) .
Bureau d’art Ecole de Paris . 2019-01-02 . Retrieved
2023-11-19 .
17. Barzel, Amnon (1974). Frenel Isaac Alexander . Israel:
Masada. p. 14.
18. "Les peintres juifs de " l'École de Paris " imposent leur génie
au MahJ"  ( https://fr.timesoﬁsrael.com/les-peintres-juifs-de-lec
ole-de-paris-imposent-leur-genie-au-mahj/ ) . Times of Israel
(in French). 6 July 2021.
19. "César Baldaccini: Master of Compression"  ( https://www.daily
artmagazine.com/cesar-baldaccini/ ) . DailyArt Magazine .
2021-01-11 . Retrieved 2021-11-23 .
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=French_art&oldid=1337345932 "
French art - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_art
Стр. 38 из 38 01.03.2026, 13:48
