Europe by cartographer Abraham Ortelius  in 1595
History of Europe
The  history  of  Europe  is  traditionally  divided  into  four  time  periods:
prehistoric Europe  (prior to about 800 BC), classical antiquity  (800 BC to AD
500), the Middle Ages  (AD 500–1500), and the modern era  (since AD 1500).
The  first  early  European  modern  humans  a p p e a r i n t h e fossil  record  about
48,000  years  ago,  during  the  Paleolithic  era.  Settled  agriculture  marked  the
Neolithic  era, which spread slowly across Europe from southeast to the north and
west. The later Neolithic period saw the introduction of early metallurgy  and the
use of copper-based tools and weapons, and the building of megalithic  structures,
as exemplified by Stonehenge . During the Indo-European migrations , Europe saw
migrations from the east and southeast. The period known as classical antiquity
began with the emergence of the city-states  of ancient Greece . Later, the Roman
Empire  came to dominate the entire Mediterranean Basin . The Migration Period
of the Germanic people  began in the late 4th century AD.
The fall of the Western Roman Empire  in AD 476 traditionally marks the start of the Middle Ages . While the Eastern Roman Empire
would continue for another 1000 years, the former lands of the Western Empire would be fragmented into a number of states. The
first great empire of the Middle Ages was the Frankish Empire  of Charlemagne , while the Islamic conquest of Iberia  established Al-
Andalus . The Viking Age  saw a second great migration of Norse  peoples. Attempts to retake the Levant  from the Muslim states that
occupied it made the High Middle Ages  the age of the Crusades , while the political system  of feudalism  reached its height. The Late
Middle Ages  were marked by a large population decline, as Europe faced the bubonic plague , as well as invasions by the Mongol
peoples from the Eurasian Steppe . At the end of the Middle Ages, there was a transitional period, known as the Renaissance .
Early modern Europe  is usually dated to the end of the 15th century. Technological changes such as gunpowder  and the printing
press  changed  how  warfare  was  conducted  and  how  knowledge  was  preserved  and  disseminated.  The  Reformation  s a w t h e
fragmentation of religious thought, leading to religious wars . The Age of Discovery  led to colonization , and the exploitation of the
people and resources of colonies brought resources and wealth to Western Europe. After 1800, the Industrial Revolution  brought
capital  accumulation and rapid urbanization  to Western Europe, while several countries transitioned away from absolutist rule  to
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 1 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
The Late Pleistocene  saw extinctions  of
numerous predominantly megafaunal
species, coinciding in time with the early
human migrations  across continents.
[ 1 ]
parliamentary regimes. The Age of Revolution  saw long-established political systems overturned. In the 20th century, World War I
led to a remaking of the map of Europe as the large empires were broken up into nation states . Lingering political issues would lead
to World War II , during which Nazi Germany  perpetrated The Holocaust . The subsequent Cold War  saw Europe divided by the Iron
Curtain  into capitalist and communist states, led by the United States  and the Soviet Union  respectively, and the creation of NATO
and  the  Warsaw  Pact .  The  West's  remaining  colonial  empires  were  dismantled .  The  last  decades  saw  the  fall  of  remaining
dictatorships in Western Europe and a gradual political integration , which led to the European Community , later the European
Union . After the Revolutions of 1989 , all European communist states transitioned  to capitalism, and in 1991 the Soviet Union came
to an end. The 21st century began with most of the former communist states gradually joining the EU . In the 2010s and 2020s,
Europe has faced the Euro area crisis , the 2015 European migrant crisis , and the Russian invasion of Ukraine .
Homo erectus  migrated from Africa to Europe before the emergence of modern humans. The
earliest appearance of anatomically modern people  in Europe has been dated to 45,000 BC,
referred  to  as  the  Early  European  modern  humans .  Some  locally  developed  transitional
cultures, Uluzzian  in Italy and Greece, Altmühlian in Germany, Szeletian  in Central Europe
and Châtelperronian  in the southwest, use clearly Upper Paleolithic  technologies at early
dates.
Nevertheless,  the  definitive  advance  of  these  technologies  is  made  by  the  Aurignacian
culture,  originating  in  the  Levant  (Ahmarian)  and  Hungary  (first  full  Aurignacian).  By
35,000  BC,  the  Aurignacian  culture  and  its  technology  had  extended  through  most  of
Europe. The last Neanderthals  seem to have been forced to retreat to the southern half of the
Iberian Peninsula . Around 29,000 BC a new technology/culture appeared in the western
region of Europe: the Gravettian . This culture has been theorised to have come with migrations of people from the Balkans : see the
Kozarnika  cave.
[ 2 ] [ 3 ]
Around 16,000 BC, Europe witnessed the appearance of the Magdalenian  culture, possibly rooted in the old Gravettian. This culture
soon superseded the Solutrean  area and the Gravettian of mainly France, Spain, Germany, Italy, Poland, Portugal and Ukraine. The
Hamburg culture  prevailed in Northern Europe in the 14th and the 13th millennium BC as the Creswellian  did shortly after in the
Prehistoric period
Paleolithic
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 2 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Chauvet Cave  painting, Aurignacian
culture , France, c. 30,000 BC
Linear Pottery culture  settlement,
Germany, c. 4700 BC
British Isles . Around 12,500 BC, the Würm glaciation  ended. Magdalenian culture persisted
until  c.  10,000  BC,  when  it  quickly  evolved  into  two  microlithist  cultures:  Azilian
( Federmesser ), in Spain and southern France , and then Sauveterrian , in southern France and
Tardenoisian  in Central Europe, while in Northern Europe the Lyngby complex  succeeded
the Hamburg culture with the influence of the Federmesser  group as well.
Evidence of permanent settlement dates from the 8th millennium BC in the Balkans. The
Neolithic  reached Central Europe  in the 6th millennium BC and parts of Northern Europe  in
the 5th and 4th millenniums BC. The modern indigenous populations of Europe are largely
descended from three distinct lineages: Mesolithic hunter-gatherers , a derivative of the Cro-
Magnon  population,  Early  European  Farmers  who  migrated  from  Anatolia  during  the
Neolithic Revolution , and Yamnaya pastoralists  who expanded into Europe in the context of
the Indo-European expansion .
[ 4 ]
 The Indo-European migrations  started in Southeast Europe
at around c.   4200 BC through the areas around the Black sea  and the Balkan peninsula . In
the next 3000 years the Indo-European languages  expanded through Europe.
Around this time, in the 5th millennium BC the Varna culture  evolved. In 4700 – 4200 BC,
the Solnitsata  town, believed to be the oldest prehistoric town in Europe, flourished.
[ 5 ] [ 6 ]
Neolithic expansion in
Europe, 7000-4000 BC
Late Neolithic Europe, c.
5000-3500 BC
Neolithic and Copper Age
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 3 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Artefacts from the Varna
necropolis , Bulgaria, c. 4500 BC
Partly reconstructed ruins of Knossos ,
Crete, c. 1700 BC
The first well-known literate civilization in Europe was the Minoan civilization  that arose on the
island of Crete  and flourished from approximately the 27th century BC to the 15th century BC.
[ 7 ]
The Minoans were replaced by the Mycenaean civilization  which flourished during the period roughly
between 1600 BC, when Helladic  culture in mainland Greece  was transformed under influences from
Minoan  Crete,  and  1100  BC.  The  major  Mycenaean  cities  were  Mycenae  a n d Tiryns  i n
Argolis, Pylos  in Messenia, Athens  in Attica, Thebes  and Orchomenus  in Boeotia, and Iolkos
in Thessaly. In Crete , the Mycenaeans occupied Knossos . Mycenaean settlement sites also
appeared in Epirus ,
[ 8 ] [ 9 ]
Macedonia ,
[ 10 ] [ 11 ]
 on islands in the Aegean Sea , on the coast of Asia
Minor , the Levant ,
[ 12 ]
Cyprus
[ 13 ]
 and Italy.
[ 14 ] [ 15 ]
 Mycenaean artefacts have been found well
outside the limits of the Mycenean world.
Quite unlike the Minoans, whose society benefited from trade, the Mycenaeans advanced
through conquest. Mycenaean civilization was dominated by a warrior aristocracy . Around
1400  BC,  the  Mycenaeans  extended  their  control  to  Crete,  the  centre  of  the  Minoan
civilization. The Mycenaean civilization perished with the collapse of Bronze-Age civilization
on the eastern shores of the Mediterranean Sea. The collapse is commonly attributed to the
Dorian invasion , although other theories describing natural disasters and climate change
have been advanced.
[ 16 ]
 Whatever the causes, the Mycenaean civilization had disappeared
after LH III C , when the sites of Mycenae and Tiryns were again destroyed. This end, during the last years of the 12th century BC,
occurred after a slow decline of the Mycenaean civilization, which lasted many years before dying out. The beginning of the 11th
century BC opened a new context, that of the protogeometric, the beginning of the geometric period, the Greek Dark Ages  o f
traditional historiography.
The Bronze Age collapse may be seen in the context of technological history that saw the slow spread of ironworking  technology from
present-day Bulgaria  and Romania  in the 13th and the 12th centuries BC.
[ 17 ]
The Tumulus culture  and the following Urnfield culture  of central Europe were part of the origin of the Roman  and Greek  cultures.
Ancient period
Bronze Age
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 4 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
The Treasury of Atreus ,
or Tomb of Agamemnon
in Mycenae , Greece
1250 BC
The Parthenon , an ancient Athenian
Temple on the Acropolis  (hill-top city) fell
to Rome in 176 BC
[ 18 ]
Classical antiquity , also known as the classical era, classical period, classical age, or simply antiquity,
[ 19 ]
 is
the  period  of  cultural  history  between  the  8th  century  BC  and  the  5th  century  AD  comprising  the
interwoven civilizations of ancient Greece  and ancient Rome  known together as the Greco-Roman world ,
centered on the Mediterranean Basin . It is the period during which Greece and Rome flourished and had
major influence throughout much of Europe , North Africa , and West Asia .
[ 20 ] [ 21 ]
The Hellenic civilisation  was a collection of city-states or poleis  with different governments and cultures
that  achieved  notable  developments  in  government,  philosophy,  science,  mathematics,
politics, sports, theatre and music.
The most powerful city-states were Athens , Sparta , Thebes , Corinth , and Syracuse . Athens
was a powerful Hellenic city-state and governed itself with an early form of direct democracy
invented  by  Cleisthenes ;  the  citizens  of  Athens  voted  on  legislation  and  executive  bills
themselves. Athens was the home of Socrates ,
[ 22 ]
Plato , and the Platonic Academy .
The  Hellenic  city-states  established  colonies  on  the  shores  of  the  Black  Sea  a n d t h e
Mediterranean Sea ( Asia Minor , Sicily , and Southern Italy  in Magna Graecia ). By the late 6th
century BC, the Greek city states in Asia Minor  had been incorporated into the Persian
Empire , while the latter had made territorial gains in the Balkans  (such as Macedon , Thrace ,
Paeonia , etc.) and Eastern Europe proper as well. During the 5th century BC, some of the
Greek city states attempted to overthrow Persian rule in the Ionian Revolt , which failed. This
sparked the first Persian invasion of mainland Greece . At some point during the ensuing
Greco-Persian Wars , namely during the Second Persian invasion of Greece , and precisely after the Battle of Thermopylae  and the
Battle of Artemisium , almost all of Greece to the north of the Isthmus of Corinth  had been overrun by the Persians,
[ 23 ]
 but the Greek
city states reached a decisive victory at the Battle of Plataea . With the end of the Greco-Persian wars, the Persians were eventually
Iron Age
Classical Antiquity
Ancient Greece
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 5 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
A mosaic  showing Alexander the Great
battling Darius III
forced to withdraw from their territories in Europe. The Greco-Persian Wars and the victory
of the Greek city states  directly influenced the entire further course of European history and
would set its further tone. Some Greek city-states formed the Delian League  to continue
fighting Persia, but Athens' position as leader of this league led Sparta to form the rival
Peloponnesian League . The Peloponnesian Wars  ensued, and the Peloponnesian League was
victorious. Subsequently, discontent with Spartan hegemony  led to the Corinthian War  and
the defeat of Sparta at the Battle of Leuctra . At the same time at the north ruled the Thracian
Odrysian Kingdom  between the 5th century BC and the 1st century AD.
Hellenic infighting left Greek city states vulnerable, and Philip II of Macedon  united the
Greek city states under his control. The son of Philip II, known as Alexander the Great ,
invaded neighboring Persia , toppled and incorporated its domains, as well as invading Egypt
and going as far off as India, increasing contact with people and cultures in these regions
that marked the beginning of the Hellenistic period .
After the death of Alexander the Great , his empire split into multiple kingdoms ruled by his generals, the Diadochi . The Diadochi
fought against each other in a series of conflicts called the Wars of the Diadochi . In the beginning of the 2nd century BC, only three
major kingdoms remained: the Ptolemaic Egypt , the Seleucid Empire  and Macedonia . These kingdoms spread Greek culture  t o
regions as far away as Bactria .
[ 24 ]
Much of Greek learning was assimilated by the nascent Roman state as it expanded outward from Italy, taking advantage of its
enemies' inability to unite: the only challenge to Roman ascent came from the Phoenician  colony of Carthage , and its defeats in the
three Punic Wars  marked the start of Roman hegemony . First governed by kings , then as a senatorial republic (the Roman Republic ),
Rome became an empire at the end of the 1st century BC, under Augustus  and his authoritarian successors.
The Roman Empire  had its centre in the Mediterranean, controlling all the countries on its shores; the northern border was marked
by  the  Rhine  a n d Danube  rivers.  Under  the  emperor Trajan  (2nd  century  AD)  the  empire  reached  its  maximum  expansion,
controlling approximately 5,900,000 km
2
 (2,300,000 sq mi) of land surface, including Italia , Gallia , Dalmatia , Aquitania , Britannia ,
Baetica , Hispania , Thrace , Macedonia , Greece , Moesia , Dacia , Pannonia , Egypt, Asia Minor , Cappadocia , Armenia , Caucasus , North
Africa, Levant  and parts of Mesopotamia . Pax Romana , a period of peace, civilisation  and an efficient centralised government  in the
subject territories ended in the 3rd century, when a series of civil wars  undermined Rome's economic and social strength.
Ancient Rome
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 6 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Cicero  addresses the Roman Senate  to
denounce Catiline 's conspiracy to
overthrow the Republic , by Cesare
Maccari .
The Colosseum  in Rome, Italy
In the 4th century, the emperors Diocletian  and Constantine  were able to slow down the
process of decline by splitting the empire into a Western  part with a capital in Rome and an
Eastern  part  with  the  capital  in  Byzantium,  or  Constantinople  (now  Istanbul).
Constantinople  is generally considered to be the center of " Eastern Orthodox civilization ".
[ 25 ]
[ 26 ]
 Whereas Diocletian severely persecuted Christianity , Constantine declared an official end
to state-sponsored persecution of Christians  in 313 with the Edict of Milan , thus setting the
stage for the Church  to become the state church of the Roman Empire  in about 380.
The Roman Empire had been repeatedly attacked by invading armies from Northern Europe
and in 476, Rome finally fell . Romulus Augustus , the last emperor of the Western Roman
Empire , surrendered to the Germanic King Odoacer .
Europe in the year 301 BC
 The Roman Republic  and
its neighbours in 58 BC
The Roman Empire at its
greatest extent in 117 AD,
under the emperor Trajan
When Emperor Constantine had reconquered Rome under the banner of the cross  in 312, he soon afterwards issued the Edict of
Milan  in 313 (preceded by the Edict of Serdica  in 311), declaring the legality of Christianity  in the Roman Empire. In addition,
Constantine officially shifted the capital of the Roman Empire from Rome to the Greek town of Byzantium , which he renamed Nova
Roma – it was later named Constantinople  ("City of Constantine").
Theodosius I , who had made Christianity the official religion of the Roman Empire , would be the last emperor to preside over a
united Roman Empire, until his death in 395. The empire was split into two halves: the Western Roman Empire  centred in Ravenna ,
and the Eastern Roman Empire (later to be referred to as the Byzantine Empire ) centred in Constantinople. The Roman Empire was
Late Antiquity and Migration Period
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 7 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Migrations from the 2nd to the 5th
century
Partition of the Roman Empire in 395: the
Western Roman Empire  is in red and the
Eastern in purple
repeatedly attacked by Hunnic , Germanic , Slavic  and other "barbarian" tribes (see: Migration
Period ), and in 476 finally the Western part  fell to the Heruli  chieftain Odoacer .
Roman authority in the Western part of the empire had collapsed, and a power vacuum left
in the wake of this collapse; the central organization, institutions, laws and power of Rome
had broken down, resulting in many areas being open to invasion by migrating tribes. Over
time, feudalism  and manorialism  arose, providing for division of land and labour, as well as a
broad if uneven hierarchy of law and protection. These localised hierarchies were based on
the bond of common people to the land on which they worked, and to a lord, who would
provide and administer both local law to settle disputes among the peasants, as well as
protection from outside invaders.
The western provinces soon were to be dominated by three great powers: first, the Franks
( Merovingian dynasty ) in Francia  481–843 AD, which covered much of present France and
Germany; second, the Visigothic kingdom  418–711 AD in the Iberian Peninsula  (modern
Spain); and third, the Ostrogothic kingdom  493–553 AD in Italy and parts of the western
Balkans. The Ostrogoths were later replaced by the Kingdom of the Lombards  568–774 AD.
Although these powers covered large territories, they did not have the great resources and
bureaucracy  of  the  Roman  empire  to  control  regions  and  localities;  more  power  and
responsibilities were left to local lords. On the other hand, it also meant more freedom,
particularly in more remote areas.
In  Italy,  Theodoric  the  Great  began  the  cultural  romanisation  of  the  new  world  he  had
constructed.  He  made  Ravenna  a c e n t r e o f Romano-Greek  culture  of  art  and  his  court
fostered  a  flowering  of  literature  and  philosophy  in  Latin . I n I b e r i a , King  Chindasuinth
created the Visigothic Code .
[ 27 ]
In the Eastern part the dominant state was the remaining Eastern Roman Empire.
In the feudal system, new princes and kings arose, the most powerful of which was arguably the Frankish ruler Charlemagne . In 800,
Charlemagne, reinforced by his massive territorial conquests, was crowned Emperor of the Romans by Pope Leo III , solidifying his
power in western Europe. Charlemagne's reign marked the beginning of a new Germanic Roman Empire in the west, the Holy
Roman Empire . Outside his borders, new forces were gathering. The Kievan Rus'  were marking out their territory, a Great Moravia
was growing, while the Angles  and the Saxons  were securing their borders.
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 8 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Europe in 526 AD with the three
dominating powers of the west
Constantine I  and Justinian I  offering their
fealty to the Virgin Mary inside the Hagia
Sophia
For the duration of the 6th century, the Eastern Roman Empire  was embroiled in a series of
deadly conflicts, first with the Persian Sassanid Empire  (see Roman–Persian Wars ), followed
by the onslaught of the arising Islamic Caliphate  ( Rashidun  and Umayyad ).  By  650,  the
provinces of Egypt , Palestine and Syria  were lost to the Muslim forces , followed by Hispania
and southern Italy  in the 7th and 8th centuries (see Muslim conquests ). The Arab invasion
from the east was stopped after the intervention of the Bulgarian Empire  (see Han Tervel ).
The Middle Ages are commonly dated from the fall of the Western Roman Empire  (or by
some scholars, before that) in the 5th century to the beginning of the early modern period  in
the 16th century marked by the rise of nation states , the division of Western Christianity in
the Reformation , the rise of humanism  in the Italian Renaissance , and the beginnings of
European overseas expansion which allowed for the Columbian Exchange .
[ 28 ] [ 29 ]
Many  consider  Emperor  Constantine  I  (reigned  306–337)  to  be  the  first  " Byzantine
emperor ". It was he who moved the imperial capital in 324 from Nicomedia  to Byzantium ,
which re-founded as Constantinople, or Nova Roma (" New Rome ").
[ 30 ]
 The city of Rome
itself had not served as the capital since the reign of Diocletian  (284–305). Some date the
beginnings of the Empire to the reign of Theodosius I  (379–395) and Christianity's official
supplanting of the pagan Roman religion , or following his death in 395, when the empire
was split into two parts, with capitals in Rome and Constantinople. Others place it yet later
in 476, when Romulus Augustulus , traditionally considered the last western emperor, was
deposed, thus leaving sole imperial authority with the emperor in the Greek East . Others
point to the reorganisation of the empire in the time of Heraclius  (c. 620) when Latin titles
and usages were officially replaced with Greek versions. In any case, the changeover was
gradual  and  by  330,  when  Constantine  inaugurated  his  new  capital,  the  process  of
hellenization  and  increasing  Christianisation  was  already  under  way.  The  Empire  is
generally considered to have ended after the fall of Constantinople  to the Ottoman Turks  in 1453. The Plague of Justinian  was a
pandemic  that afflicted the Byzantine Empire, including its capital Constantinople , in the years 541–542. It is estimated that the
Post-classical and medieval Europe
Byzantium
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 9 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Europe in the Early Middle Ages
Plague of Justinian killed as many as 100 million people.
[ 31 ] [ 32 ]
 It caused Europe's population  to drop by around 50% between 541
and 700.
[ 33 ]
 It also may have contributed to the success of the Muslim conquests .
[ 34 ] [ 35 ]
 During most of its existence, the Byzantine
Empire was one of the most powerful economic, cultural, and military forces in Europe, and Constantinople  was one of the largest
and wealthiest cities in Europe.
[ 36 ]
The Early Middle Ages span roughly five centuries from 500 to 1000.
[ 37 ]
In the East and Southeast  of Europe new dominant states formed: the Avar Khaganate
(567–after 822), Old Great Bulgaria  (632–668), the Khazar Khaganate  (c. 650–969)
and  Danube  Bulgaria  (founded  by  Asparuh  i n 6 8 0 ) w e r e c o n s t a n t l y r i v a l i n g t h e
hegemony of the Byzantine Empire.
From the 7th century Byzantine history was greatly affected by the rise of Islam and
the Caliphates . Muslim Arabs  first invaded historically Roman territory under Abū
Bakr , first Caliph of the Rashidun Caliphate , who entered Roman Syria  and Roman
Mesopotamia . As the Byzantines and neighboring Sasanids  were severely weakened
by the time, amongst the most important reason(s) being the protracted, centuries-
lasting  and  frequent  Byzantine–Sasanian  wars ,  which  included  the  climactic
Byzantine–Sasanian War of 602–628 , under Umar , the second Caliph, the Muslims
entirely  toppled  the  Sasanid  Persian  Empire ,  and  decisively  conquered  Syria  and
Mesopotamia, as well as Roman Palestine , Roman Egypt , and parts of Asia Minor  and Roman North Africa . In the mid 7th century
AD, following the Muslim conquest of Persia , Islam penetrated into the Caucasus  region, of which parts would later  permanently
become part of the Russian Empire .
[ 38 ]
 This trend, which included the conquests by the invading Muslim forces and by that the
spread  of  Islam  as  well  continued  under  Umar's  successors  and  under  the  Umayyad  Caliphate ,  which  conquered  the  rest  of
Mediterranean North Africa and most of the Iberian Peninsula . Over the next centuries Muslim forces were able to take further
European territory, including Cyprus , Malta, Crete , and Sicily and parts of southern Italy .
[ 39 ]
The Muslim conquest of Hispania began when the Moors  invaded the Christian Visigothic  kingdom of Hispania  in 711, under the
Berber general Tariq ibn Ziyad . They landed at Gibraltar  on 30 April and worked their way northward. Tariq's forces were joined the
next year by those of his Arab superior, Musa ibn Nusair . During the eight-year campaign most of the Iberian Peninsula  was brought
under Muslim rule – save for small areas in the northwest ( Asturias ) and largely Basque  regions in the Pyrenees . In 711, Visigothic
Hispania  was weakened because it was immersed in a serious internal crisis caused by a war of succession to the throne. The
Early Middle Ages
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 10 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Europe in 1000, with most European states
already formed
Muslims took advantage of the crisis within the Hispano - Visigothic  society to carry out their conquests. This territory, under the
Arab name Al-Andalus , became part of the expanding Umayyad  empire.
The  second  siege  of  Constantinople  (717)  ended  unsuccessfully  after  the  intervention  of  Tervel  of  Bulgaria  a n d w e a k e n e d t h e
Umayyad  dynasty and reduced their prestige. In 722 Don Pelayo  formed an army of 300 Astur  soldiers, to confront Munuza's Muslim
troops. In the battle of Covadonga , the Astures defeated the Arab-Moors, who decided to retire. The Christian victory marked the
beginning  of  the  Reconquista  a n d t h e e s t a b l i s h m e n t o f t h e Kingdom  of  Asturias ,  whose  first  sovereign  was  Don  Pelayo.  The
conquerors intended to continue their expansion in Europe and move northeast across the Pyrenees, but were defeated by the
Frankish  leader Charles Martel  at the Battle of Poitiers  in 732. The Umayyads were overthrown in 750 by the ' Abbāsids ,
[ 40 ]
 and, in
756, the Umayyads established an independent emirate  in the Iberian Peninsula.
[ 41 ]
The Holy Roman Empire  emerged around 800, as Charlemagne, King of the Franks  and
part of the Carolingian dynasty , was crowned by the pope as emperor. His empire based
in modern France, the Low Countries  and Germany expanded into modern Hungary,
Italy, Bohemia , Lower Saxony and Spain. He and his father received substantial help
from an alliance with the Pope, who wanted help against the Lombards .
[ 42 ]
 His death
marked the beginning of the end of the dynasty, which collapsed entirely by 888. The
fragmentation of power led to semi-autonomy in the region, and has been defined as a
critical starting point for the formation of states  in Europe.
[ 43 ]
To the east, Bulgaria  was established in 681 and became the first Slavic  country.  T h e
powerful Bulgarian Empire was the main rival of Byzantium for control of the Balkans
for centuries and from the 9th century became the cultural centre of Slavic Europe. The
Empire  created the Cyrillic script  during the 9th century AD, at the Preslav  Literary
School , and experienced the Golden Age  of Bulgarian cultural prosperity during the reign
of emperor Simeon I the Great  (893–927). Two states, Great Moravia  and Kievan Rus' ,
emerged among the Slavic peoples respectively in the 9th century. In the late 9th and 10th centuries, northern and western Europe
felt the burgeoning power and influence of the Vikings  who raided, traded, conquered and settled swiftly and efficiently with their
advanced seagoing vessels such as the longships . The Vikings  had left a cultural  influence on the Anglo-Saxons  and Franks  as well as
the Scots .
[ 44 ]
 The Hungarians  pillaged mainland Europe, the Pechenegs  raided Bulgaria, Rus States and the Arab  states. In the 10th
century independent kingdoms were established in Central Europe including Poland and the newly settled Kingdom of Hungary . The
Kingdom of Croatia  also appeared in the Balkans. The subsequent period, ending around 1000, saw the further growth of feudalism ,
Feudal Christendom
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 11 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Europe in 1097, as the First Crusade  to
the Holy Land  commences
which weakened the Holy Roman Empire.
In eastern Europe, Volga Bulgaria  became an Islamic state in 921, after Almış I  converted to Islam under the missionary efforts of
Ahmad ibn Fadlan .
[ 45 ]
Slavery in the early medieval period  had mostly died out in western Europe by about the year 1000 AD, replaced by serfdom . It
lingered longer in England and in peripheral areas linked to the Muslim world, where slavery continued to flourish. Church rules
suppressed slavery of Christians. Most historians argue the transition was quite abrupt around 1000, but some see a gradual
transition from about 300 to 1000.
[ 46 ]
In 1054, the East–West Schism  occurred between the two remaining Christian seats in Rome
and Constantinople  (modern Istanbul).
The  High  Middle  Ages  of  the  11th,  12th,  and  13th  centuries  show  a  rapidly  increasing
population  of Europe, which caused great social and political change from the preceding era.
By 1250, the robust population increase greatly benefited the economy, reaching levels it
would not see again in some areas until the 19th century.
[ 47 ]
From about the year 1000 onwards, Western Europe saw the last of the barbarian invasions
and became more politically organized. The Vikings  had settled in Britain, Ireland, France
and  elsewhere,  whilst  Norse  Christian  kingdoms  were  developing  in  their  Scandinavian
homelands. The Magyars  had ceased their expansion in the 10th century, and by the year
1000, the Roman Catholic Apostolic Kingdom  of Hungary was recognised in central Europe.
With the brief exception of the Mongol invasions , major barbarian incursions ceased.
Bulgarian sovereignty was re-established with the anti-Byzantine uprising of the Bulgarians and Vlachs  in 1185. The crusaders
invaded the Byzantine Empire, captured Constantinople in 1204 and established their Latin Empire . Kaloyan of Bulgaria  defeated
Baldwin I , Latin Emperor of Constantinople , in the Battle of Adrianople  on 14 April 1205. The reign of Ivan Asen II of Bulgaria  led to
maximum territorial expansion and that of Ivan Alexander of Bulgaria  to a Second Golden Age of Bulgarian culture . The Byzantine
Empire was fully re-established in 1261.
In the 11th century, populations north of the Alps  began to settle new lands. Vast forests and marshes of Europe were cleared and
cultivated. At the same time settlements moved beyond the traditional boundaries of the Frankish Empire  to new frontiers in Europe,
High Middle Ages
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 12 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
The Siege of Antioch , from a medieval
miniature painting, during the First
Crusade
beyond the Elbe  river, tripling the size of Germany in the process. Crusaders founded European colonies  in the Levant , the majority
of  the  Iberian  Peninsula  was  conquered  from  the  Muslims,  and  the  Normans  colonised  southern  Italy,  all  part  of  the  major
population increase and resettlement pattern.
The High Middle Ages produced many different forms of intellectual, spiritual and artistic works . The most famous are the great
cathedrals as expressions of Gothic architecture , which evolved from Romanesque architecture . This age saw the rise of modern
nation-states in Western Europe and the ascent of the famous Italian city-states , such as Florence  and Venice . The influential popes
of the Catholic Church called volunteer armies from across Europe to a series of Crusades  against the Seljuq Turks , who occupied the
Holy  Land .  The  rediscovery  of  the  works  of  Aristotle  l e d Thomas  Aquinas  and  other  thinkers  to  develop  the  philosophy  of
Scholasticism .
After  the  East–West  Schism , Western  Christianity  was  adopted  by  the  newly  created
kingdoms of Central Europe: Poland , Hungary and Bohemia . The Roman Catholic Church
developed  as  a  major  power,  leading  to  conflicts  between  the  Pope  and  emperor.  The
geographic  reach  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  expanded  enormously  due  to  the
conversions  of  pagan  kings  (Scandinavia,  Lithuania ,  Poland,  Hungary),  the  Christian
Reconquista  of Al-Andalus , and the Crusades. Most of Europe was Roman Catholic in the
15th century.
Early signs of the rebirth of civilization in western Europe began to appear in the 11th century
as trade started again in Italy, leading to the economic and cultural growth of independent
city-states  such as Venice  and Florence ; at the same time, nation-states began to take form in
places such as France, England, Spain, and Portugal, although the process of their formation
(usually  marked  by  rivalry  between  the  monarchy,  the  aristocratic  feudal  lords  and  the
church) actually took several centuries. These new nation-states began writing in their own
cultural vernaculars, instead of the traditional Latin . Notable figures of this movement would
include Dante Alighieri  and Christine de Pizan . The Holy Roman Empire , essentially based in
Germany and Italy, further fragmented into a myriad of feudal principalities or small city states, whose subjection to the emperor
was only formal.
The 14th century, when the Mongol Empire  came to power, is often called the Age of the Mongols . Mongol armies expanded
westward  under the command of Batu Khan . Their western conquests included almost all of Kievan Rus'  and the Kipchak-Cuman
Holy wars
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 13 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
The Capitulation of Granada , Francisco
Pradilla , represents the moment when
the Muslim ruler Boabdil  surrendered the
keys and sovereignty of the city of
Granada  to Queen Isabella I of Castile
and King Ferdinand II of Aragon ,
symbolizing the end of Muslim presence
in the Iberian Peninsula  and therefore the
completion of the Reconquista .
Christianization of Lithuania in 1387 , oil
on canvas by Jan Matejko , 1889, Royal
Castle in Warsaw
Confederation . Bulgaria ,  Hungary,  and  Poland  managed  to  remain  sovereign  states.
Mongolian  records  indicate  that  Batu  Khan  was  planning  a  complete  conquest  of  the
remaining European powers, beginning with a winter attack on Austria, Italy and Germany,
when he was recalled to Mongolia  upon the death of Great Khan Ögedei . Most historians
believe only his death prevented the complete conquest of Europe.  T he ar eas of Easter n
Europe and most of Central Asia that were under direct Mongol rule became known as the
Golden Horde . Under Uzbeg Khan , Islam became the official religion of the region in the
early 14th century.
[ 48 ]
 The invading Mongols, together with their mostly Turkic subjects,
were  known  as  Tatars .  In  Russia,  the  Tatars  ruled  the  Russian  principalities  through
vassalage for over 200 years, with the Great Stand on the Ugra River  traditionally marking
the end of the "Tatar yoke" over Russia.
[ 49 ] [ 50 ]
In the Northern Europe, Konrad of Masovia  gave Chełmno  to the Teutonic Knights  in 1226 as
a base for a Crusade against the Old Prussians  and Grand Duchy of Lithuania . The Livonian
Brothers of the Sword  were defeated by the Lithuanians, so in 1237 Gregory IX merged the
remainder of the order into the Teutonic Order as the Livonian Order . By the middle of the
century, the Teutonic Knights completed their conquest of the Prussians before converting
the  Lithuanians  in  the  subsequent  decades.  The  order  also  came  into  conflict  with  the
Eastern  Orthodox  Church  of  the  Pskov  a n d Novgorod  Republics .  In  1240  the  Orthodox
Novgorod army defeated the Catholic Swedes in the Battle of the Neva , and, two years later,
they defeated the Livonian Order in the Battle on the Ice . The Union of Krewo  i n 1 3 8 6 ,
bringing two major changes in the history of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania: conversion to
Catholicism  and establishment of a dynastic union  between the Grand Duchy of Lithuania
and the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland  marked both the greatest territorial expansion of
the Grand Duchy and the defeat of the Teutonic Knights in the Battle of Grunwald  in 1410.
The Late Middle Ages spanned around the 14th and late 15th centuries.
[ 51 ]
 Around 1300,
centuries of European prosperity and growth came to a halt. A series of famines and plagues, such as the Great Famine of 1315–1317
and the Black Death , killed people in a matter of days, reducing the population of some areas by half as many survivors fled.
Kishlansky  reports:
The Black Death touched every aspect of life, hastening a process of social, economic, and cultural transformation already
Late Middle Ages
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 14 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
The spread of the "Black Death" from
1347 to 1351 through Europe
underway.... Fields were abandoned, workplaces stood idle, international trade was
suspended. Traditional bonds of kinship, village, and even religion were broken amid
the horrors of death, ﬂight, and failed expectations. "People cared no more for dead
men than we care for dead goats," wrote one survivor.
[ 52 ]
Depopulation caused labor to become scarcer; the survivors were better paid and peasants
could drop some of the burdens of feudalism. There was also social unrest; France and
England  experienced  serious  peasant  risings  including  the  Jacquerie  a n d t h e Peasants'
Revolt . The unity of the Catholic Church was shattered by the Great Schism . C o l l e c t i v e l y
these events have been called the Crisis of the Late Middle Ages .
[ 53 ]
Beginning in the 14th century, the Baltic Sea  became one of the most important trade routes .
The Hanseatic League , an alliance of trading cities, facilitated the absorption of vast areas of
Poland, Lithuania , and Livonia  into trade with other European countries. This fed the growth
of powerful states in this part of Europe including Poland–Lithuania, Hungary, Bohemia,
and Muscovy later on. The conventional end of the Middle Ages  is usually associated with the
fall of the city of Constantinople  and of the Byzantine Empire to the Ottoman Turks  in 1453.
The Turks made the city the capital of their Ottoman Empire , which lasted until 1922 and
included Egypt, Syria, and most of the Balkans. The Ottoman wars in Europe  marked an
essential part of the history of the continent.
A key 15th-century development was the advent of the movable type of printing press  circa 1439 in Mainz,
[ 54 ]
 building upon the
impetus provided by the prior introduction of paper  from China via the Arabs in the High Middle Ages.
[ 55 ]
 The adoption of the
technology across the continent at dazzling speed for the remaining part of the 15th century would usher a revolution and by 1500
over 200 cities in Europe had presses that printed between 8 and 20 million books.
[ 54 ]
The Early Modern period spans the centuries between the Middle Ages  and the Industrial Revolution , roughly from 1500 to 1800, or
from the discovery of the New World in 1492 to the French Revolution  in 1789. The period is characterised by the rise in importance
of science and increasingly rapid technological progress , secularised civic politics, and the nation state. Capitalist economies  began
their rise, and the early modern period also saw the rise and dominance of the economic theory of mercantilism . As such, the early
modern period represents the decline and eventual disappearance, in much of the European sphere, of feudalism , serfdom and the
power of the Catholic Church. The period includes the Renaissance , the Scientific Revolution , the Protestant Reformation , t h e
Early modern Europe
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 15 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
The Holy Roman Empire  was a limited
elective monarchy composed of
hundreds of state-like entities .
Genoese  (red) and Venetian  (green)
maritime trade routes in the
Mediterranean  and Black Sea
disastrous Thirty Years' War , the European colonisation of the Americas  and the European
witch-hunts .
Despite these crises, the 14th century was also a time of great progress within the arts and
sciences. A renewed interest in ancient Greek  and Roman  led to the Italian Renaissance , a
cultural movement that profoundly affected European intellectual life in the early modern
period. Beginning in Italy, and spreading to the north, west and middle Europe  during a
cultural lag of some two and a half centuries, its influence affected literature, philosophy, art,
politics, science, history, religion, and other aspects of intellectual inquiry. The Humanists
saw their repossession of a great past as a Renaissance – a rebirth of civilization itself.
[ 56 ]
Important political precedents were also set in this period. Niccolò Machiavelli 's  political
writing in The Prince  influenced later absolutism and realpolitik. Also important were the
many patrons who ruled states and used the artistry of the Renaissance as a sign of their
power.
The  Scientific  Revolution  took  place  in  Europe  starting  towards  the  second  half  of  the
Renaissance  period,  with  the  1543  Nicolaus  Copernicus  publication  De  revolutionibus
orbium coelestium  ( On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres ) often cited as its beginning.
Toward the end of the period, an era of discovery began. The growth of the Ottoman Empire ,
culminating in the fall of Constantinople  in 1453, cut off trading possibilities with the east.
Western Europe was forced to discover new trading routes, as happened with Columbus'
travel to the Americas in 1492, and Vasco da Gama 's circumnavigation of India and Africa in
1498.
The numerous wars did not prevent European states from exploring and conquering wide portions of the world, from Africa to Asia
and the newly discovered Americas. In the 15th century, Portugal  led the way in geographical exploration along the coast of Africa in
search of a maritime route to India, followed by Spain near the close of the 15th century, dividing their exploration of the world
according to the Treaty of Tordesillas  in 1494.
[ 57 ]
 They were the first states to set up colonies in America and European trading posts
(factories)  along the shores of Africa and Asia, establishing the first direct European diplomatic contacts with Southeast Asian states
Renaissance
Exploration and trade
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 16 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Portrait of Luca Pacioli , the founder of
accounting, by Jacopo de' Barbari
( Museo di Capodimonte )
Cantino planisphere , 1502, earliest chart
showing explorations by Vasco da Gama ,
Columbus  and Cabral
in 1511, China in 1513 and Japan in 1542. In 1552, Russian tsar Ivan the Terrible  conquered
two major Tatar  khanates, the Khanate of Kazan  and the Astrakhan Khanate . The Yermak 's
voyage of 1580 led to the annexation of the Tatar Siberian Khanate  into Russia, and the
Russians would soon after conquer the rest of Siberia , steadily expanding to the east and
south over the next centuries. Oceanic explorations soon followed by France, England and
the Netherlands, who explored the Portuguese and Spanish trade routes into the Pacific
Ocean, reaching Australia in 1606
[ 58 ]
 and New Zealand in 1642.
With  the  development  of  the  printing  press ,  new  ideas  spread  throughout  Europe  and
challenged traditional doctrines in science and theology. Simultaneously, the Reformation
under German Martin Luther  questioned Papal authority. The most common dating of the
Reformation begins in 1517, when Luther published The Ninety-Five Theses , and concludes
in 1648 with the Treaty of Westphalia  that ended years of European religious wars .
[ 59 ]
During this period corruption in the Catholic Church led to a sharp backlash in the Protestant
Reformation. It gained many followers especially among princes and kings seeking a stronger
state by ending the influence of the Catholic Church. Figures other than Martin Luther  began
to emerge as well like John Calvin  whose Calvinism  had influence in many countries and
King Henry VIII  of England who broke away from the Catholic Church in England and set up
the Anglican Church . These religious divisions brought on a wave of wars inspired and driven
by religion but also by the ambitious monarchs in Western Europe who were becoming more
centralized and powerful.
The Protestant Reformation also led to a strong reform movement in the Catholic Church
called the Counter-Reformation , which aimed to reduce corruption as well as to improve and strengthen Catholic dogma. Two
important groups in the Catholic Church who emerged from this movement were the Jesuits , who helped keep Spain, Portugal,
Poland, and other European countries within the Catholic fold, and the Oratorians of Saint Philip Neri , who ministered to the faithful
in Rome, restoring their confidence in the Church of Jesus Christ that subsisted substantially in the Church of Rome. Still, the
Catholic Church was somewhat weakened by the Reformation, portions of Europe were no longer under its sway and kings in the
remaining Catholic countries began to take control of the church institutions within their kingdoms.
Unlike  many  European  countries  at  the  time,  the  Polish–Lithuanian  Commonwealth  w a s n o t a b l y t o l e r a n t o f t h e P r o t e s t a n t
Reformation
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 17 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Martin Luther initiated the Reformation  with his Ninety-
ﬁve Theses  in 1517.
Habsburg  realms (green) under Charles
V, Holy Roman Emperor
The evolution of Colonial empires  from
1492 to the present
movement, as well the Principality of Transylvania . A degree of tolerance was
also displayed in Ottoman Hungary . While still enforcing the predominance of
Catholicism, they continued to allow the large religious minorities to maintain
their  faiths,  traditions  and  customs.  The  Polish–Lithuanian  Commonwealth
became  divided  among  Catholics,  Protestants,  Orthodox,  Jews  and  a  small
Muslim population.
Another  development  was  the  idea  of  'European  superiority'.  There  was  a
movement by some such as Montaigne  that regarded the non-Europeans as a
better, more natural and primitive people. Post services were founded all over
Europe,  which  allowed  a  humanistic  interconnected  network  of  intellectuals
across Europe, despite religious divisions. However, the Roman Catholic Church
banned many leading scientific works; this led to an intellectual advantage for
Protestant  countries,  where  the  banning  of  books  was  regionally  organised.
Francis Bacon  and other advocates of science tried to create unity in Europe by focusing on
the unity in nature. In the 15th century, at the end of the Middle Ages, powerful sovereign
states were appearing, built by the New Monarchs  who were centralising power in France,
England,  and  Spain.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Parliament  in  the  Polish–Lithuanian
Commonwealth  grew in power, taking legislative rights from the Polish king. The new state
power was contested by parliaments in other countries especially England. New kinds of
states emerged which were co-operation agreements among territorial rulers, cities, farmer
republics and knights.
The Iberian  kingdoms were able to dominate colonial activity in the 16th century. The
Portuguese forged the first global empire in the 15th and 16th century, whilst during the
16th century and the first half of the 17th century, the crown of Castile (and the overarching
Hispanic  Monarchy,  including  Portugal  from  1580  to  1640)  became  the  most  powerful
empire in the world. Spanish dominance in America was increasingly challenged by British ,
French , Dutch  and Swedish  colonial efforts of the 17th and 18th centuries. New forms of
trade  and  expanding  horizons  made  new  forms  of  government , law  a n d e c o n o m i c s
necessary.
Mercantilism and colonial expansion
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 18 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Contemporary woodcut depicting the
Second Defenestration of Prague  (1618),
which marked the beginning of the
Bohemian Revolt , which began the ﬁrst
part of the Thirty Years' War
Colonial expansion continued in the following centuries (with some setbacks, such as successful wars of independence in the British
American colonies  and then later Haiti , Mexico , Argentina , Brazil , and others  amid European turmoil of the Napoleonic Wars ). Spain
had control of a large part of North America, all of Central America and a great part of South America, the Caribbean and the
Philippines ; Britain took the whole of Australia and New Zealand, most of India, and large parts of Africa and North America; France
held parts of Canada and India (nearly all of which was lost to Britain in 1763 ), Indochina , large parts of Africa and the Caribbean
islands; the Netherlands gained the East Indies  (now Indonesia ) and islands in the Caribbean; Portugal obtained Brazil and several
territories in Africa and Asia; and later, powers such as Germany, Belgium, Italy and Russia acquired further colonies.
This expansion helped the economy of the countries owning them. Trade  flourished, because of the minor stability of the empires. By
the late 16th century, American silver accounted for one-fifth of Spain's total budget.
[ 60 ] [ 61 ]
 The French colony  of Saint-Domingue
was one of richest European colonies in the 18th century, operating on a plantation economy  fueled by slave labor . During the period
of French rule, cash crops  produced in Saint-Domingue comprised thirty percent of total French trade while its sugar exports
represented forty percent of the Atlantic market.
[ 62 ] [ 63 ]
The 17th century is typically framed as an era of crisis.
[ 64 ] [ 65 ]
 Many historians have rejected
the  idea,  while  others  promote  it  as  an  invaluable  insight  into  the  warfare,  politics,
economics,
[ 66 ]
 and even art.
[ 67 ]
 The Thirty Years' War  (1618–1648) focused attention on the
massive horrors that wars could bring to entire populations.
[ 68 ]
 The 1640s in particular saw
more state breakdowns around the world than any previous or subsequent period.
[ 64 ] [ 65 ]
 The
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth , the largest state in Europe, temporarily disappeared. In
addition, there were secessions and upheavals in several parts of the Spanish empire, the
world's  first  global  empire.  In  Britain  the  entire  Stuart  monarchy  ( England , Scotland ,
Ireland , a n d i t s North  American  colonies )  rebelled.  Political  insurgency  and  a  spate  of
popular revolts seldom equalled shook the foundations of most states in Europe and Asia.
More wars took place around the world in the mid-17th century than in almost any other
period  of  recorded  history.  Across  the  Northern  Hemisphere ,  the  mid-17th  century
experienced almost unprecedented death rates.
The "absolute" rule of powerful monarchs such as Louis XIV  (ruled France 1643–1715),
[ 69 ]
Peter the Great  (ruled Russia 1682–1725),
[ 70 ]
Maria Theresa  (ruled Habsburg lands  1740–1780) and Frederick the Great  (ruled Prussia 1740–86),
[ 71 ]
 produced  powerful
Crisis of the 17th century
Age of absolutism
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 19 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Maria Theresa being crowned Queen of
Hungary in the St. Martin's Cathedral ,
Pressburg ( Bratislava )
centralized states, with strong armies and powerful bureaucracies, all under the control of the
king.
[ 72 ]
Throughout the early part of this period, capitalism (through mercantilism) was replacing
feudalism as the principal form of economic organisation, at least in the western half of
Europe. The expanding colonial frontiers resulted in a Commercial Revolution . The period is
noted for the rise of modern science and the application of its findings to technological
improvements, which animated the Industrial Revolution after 1750.
The Reformation had profound effects on the unity of Europe. Not only were nations divided
one from another by their religious orientation, but some states were torn apart internally by
religious strife, avidly fostered by their external enemies. France suffered this fate in the 16th
century in the series of conflicts known as the French Wars of Religion , which ended in the
triumph of the Bourbon Dynasty . England settled down under Elizabeth I  to a moderate
Anglicanism .  Much  of  modern-day  Germany  was  made  up  of  numerous  small  sovereign
states  under  the  theoretical  framework  of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire ,  which  was  further
divided along internally drawn sectarian lines. The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth  i s
notable in this time for its religious indifference  and general immunity to European religious
strife.
The Thirty Years' War  was fought between 1618 and 1648, across Germany and neighbouring areas, and involved most of the major
European powers except England and Russia,
[ 73 ]
 involving Catholics versus Protestants for the most part. The major impact of the
war was the devastation of entire regions scavenged bare by the foraging armies. Episodes of widespread famine and disease, and the
breakup of family life, devastated the population of the German states and, to a lesser extent, the Low Countries , the Crown  of
Bohemia  and northern parts of Italy, while bankrupting many of the regional powers involved. Between one-fourth and one-third of
the German population perished from direct military causes or from disease and starvation, as well as postponed births.
[ 74 ]
After the Peace of Westphalia , which ended the war in favour of nations deciding their own religious allegiance, absolutism  became
the norm of the continent, while parts of Europe experimented with constitutions foreshadowed by the English Civil War  a n d
particularly  the  Glorious  Revolution .  European  military  conflict  did  not  cease,  but  had  less  disruptive  effects  on  the  lives  of
Europeans. In the advanced northwest, the Enlightenment  gave a philosophical underpinning to the new outlook, and the continued
spread of literacy, made possible by the printing press , created new secular forces in thought.
Thirty Years' War 1618–1648
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 20 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Europe after the Peace of Westphalia  in
1648
The defeat of the Ottoman Turks  at the
Battle of Vienna  in 1683 marked the
historic end of Ottoman expansion into
Europe .
From the Union of Krewo, central and eastern Europe was dominated by Kingdom of Poland
and Grand Duchy of Lithuania . In the 16th and 17th centuries Central and Eastern Europe
was  an  arena  of  conflict  for  domination  of  the  continent  between  Sweden , t h e P o l i s h –
Lithuanian Commonwealth (involved in series of wars, like Khmelnytsky uprising , Russo-
Polish War , the Deluge , etc.) and the Ottoman Empire . This period saw a gradual decline of
these  three  powers  which  were  eventually  replaced  by  new  enlightened  absolutist
monarchies: Russia, Prussia and Austria (the Habsburg monarchy ). By the turn of the 19th
century  they  had  become  new  powers,  having  divided  Poland  b e t w e e n t h e m s e l v e s , w i t h
Sweden and Turkey having experienced substantial territorial losses to Russia and Austria
respectively as well as pauperisation.
The War of the Spanish Succession  (1701–1715) was a major war with France opposed by a
coalition  of  England,  the  Netherlands,  the  Habsburg  monarchy,  and  Prussia.  Duke  of
Marlborough  commanded the English and Dutch victory at the Battle of Blenheim  in 1704.
The main issue was whether France under King Louis XIV would take control of Spain's very
extensive possessions and thereby become by far the dominant power, or be forced to share
power  with  other  major  nations.  After  initial  allied  successes,  the  long  war  produced  a
military stalemate and ended with the Treaty of Utrecht , which was based on a balance of
power  in  Europe.  Historian  Russell  Weigley  argues  that  the  many  wars  almost  never
accomplished more than they cost.
[ 75 ]
 British historian G. M. Trevelyan  argues:
That Treaty [of Utrecht], which ushered in the stable and characteristic period of
Eighteenth-Century civilization, marked the end of danger to Europe from the old
French monarchy, and it marked a change of no less signiﬁcance to the world at large –
the maritime, commercial and ﬁnancial supremacy of Great Britain.
[ 76 ]
Frederick the Great , king of Prussia 1740–86, modernized the Prussian army , introduced new tactical and strategic concepts, fought
mostly successful wars ( Silesian Wars , Seven Years' War) and doubled the size of Prussia.
[ 77 ] [ 78 ]
War of the Spanish Succession
Prussia
Russia
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 21 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Russian expansion in Eurasia between 1533
and 1894
Isaac Newton  and Jean-Jacques Rousseau
Russia fought numerous wars to achieve rapid expansion toward the east – i.e. Siberia ,
Far East , south – to the Black Sea, and south-east and to central Asia. Russia boasted a
large and powerful army , a very large and complex internal bureaucracy, and a splendid
court that rivaled Paris and London. However the government was living far beyond its
means  and  seized  Church  lands,  leaving  organized  religion  in  a  weak  condition.
Throughout  the  18th  century  Russia  remained  "a  poor,  backward,  overwhelmingly
agricultural, and illiterate country."
[ 79 ]
The  Enlightenment  was  a  powerful,  widespread  cultural  movement  of  intellectuals
beginning in late 17th-century Europe emphasizing the power of reason  r a t h e r t h a n
tradition; it was especially favourable to science (especially Isaac Newton's physics) and
hostile to religious orthodoxy (especially of the Catholic Church).
[ 80 ]
 It sought to analyze
and reform society using reason, to challenge ideas grounded in tradition and faith, and to advance knowledge through the scientific
method . It promoted scientific thought, skepticism, and intellectual interchange.
[ 81 ]
 The Enlightenment was a revolution in human
thought. This new way of thinking was that rational thought begins with clearly stated principles, uses correct logic to arrive at
conclusions, tests the conclusions against evidence, and then revises the principles in light of the evidence.
[ 81 ]
Enlightenment  thinkers  opposed  superstition.  Some  Enlightenment  thinkers
collaborated  with  Enlightened  despots ,  absolutist  rulers  who  attempted  to  forcibly
impose  some  of  the  new  ideas  about  government  into  practice.  The  ideas  of  the
Enlightenment exerted significant influence on the culture, politics, and governments of
Europe.
[ 82 ]
Originating in the 17th century, it was sparked by philosophers Francis Bacon , Baruch
Spinoza , John  Locke , Pierre  Bayle , Voltaire , Francis  Hutcheson , David  Hume  a n d
physicist Isaac Newton .
[ 83 ]
 Ruling princes often endorsed and fostered these figures
and  even  attempted  to  apply  their  ideas  of  government  in  what  was  known  as
enlightened absolutism . The Scientific Revolution  is closely tied to the Enlightenment,
as  its  discoveries  overturned  many  traditional  concepts  and  introduced  new
perspectives on nature and man's place within it. The Enlightenment flourished until
about 1790–1800, at which point the Enlightenment, with its emphasis on reason, gave way to Romanticism , which placed a new
emphasis on emotion; a Counter-Enlightenment  began to increase in prominence.
Enlightenment
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 22 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
The boundaries set by the Congress of Vienna, 1815
In France, Enlightenment was based in the salons  and culminated in the great Encyclopédie  (1751–72). These new intellectual strains
would spread to urban centres across Europe, notably England, Scotland, the German states, the Netherlands, Poland, Russia, Italy,
Austria, and Spain, as well as Britain's American colonies . The political ideals of the Enlightenment influenced the United States
Declaration of Independence , the United States Bill of Rights , the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen , and the
Polish–Lithuanian Constitution of 3 May 1791 .
[ 84 ]
Norman Davies has argued that Freemasonry  was a powerful force on behalf of Liberalism and Enlightenment ideas in Europe, from
about 1700 to the 20th century. It expanded rapidly during the Age of Enlightenment , reaching practically every country in Europe.
[ 85 ]
 The great enemy of Freemasonry was the Roman Catholic Church, so that in countries with a large Catholic element, such as
France, Italy, Austria, Spain and Mexico, much of the ferocity of the political battles involve the confrontation between supporters of
the  Church  versus  active  Masons.
[ 86 ] [ 87 ]
 20th-century  totalitarian  and  revolutionary  movements,  especially  the  Fascists  a n d
Communists , crushed the Freemasons.
[ 88 ]
The " long 19th century ", from 1789 to 1914 saw the drastic social, political and
economic changes initiated by the Industrial Revolution , the French Revolution
and the Napoleonic Wars . Following the reorganisation of the political map of
Europe  at  the  Congress  of  Vienna  in  1815,  Europe  experienced  the  rise  of
Nationalism, the rise of the Russian Empire  and the peak of the British Empire, as
well as the decline of the Ottoman Empire . Finally, the rise of the German Empire
and the Austro-Hungarian Empire  initiated the course of events that culminated
in the outbreak of the First World War in 1914.
The Industrial Revolution saw major changes in agriculture, manufacturing, and
transport impacted  Britain and  subsequently  spread  to  the  United  States  and
Western Europe. Technological advancements, most notably the utilization of the
steam engine, were major catalysts in the industrialisation process. It started in England and Scotland in the mid-18th century with
the mechanisation of the textile industries, the development of iron-making techniques and the increased use of coal as the main
Revolutions and Imperialism
Industrial Revolution
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 23 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
London's chimney sky in 1870, by
Gustave Doré
fuel.  Trade  expansion  was  enabled  by  the  introduction  of  canals ,  improved  roads  and
railways.  The  introduction  of  steam  power  (fuelled  primarily  by  coal)  and  powered
machinery  (mainly  in  textile  manufacturing )  underpinned  the  dramatic  increases  in
production capacity.
[ 89 ]
The development of all-metal machine tools  in the first two decades of the 19th century
facilitated  the  manufacture  of  more  production  machines  for  manufacturing  in  other
industries. The effects spread throughout Western Europe and North America during the
19th century, eventually affecting most of the world.
[ 90 ]
During and after the Industrial Revolution pervasive poverty existed throughout Europe but
at the same time, as the Nineteenth Century progressed, living standards for lower-class
Europeans  steadily  rose,  with  improvements  in  wages,  housing  and  diets  while  working
hours fell.
[ 91 ]
Historians R.R. Palmer  and Joel Colton  argue:
In 1789 France fell into revolution, and the world has never since been the same. The French Revolution was by far the most
momentous upheaval of the whole revolutionary age. It replaced the "old regime" with "modern society," and at its extreme
phase became very radical, so much so that all later revolutionary movements have looked back to it as a predecessor to
themselves.... From the 1760s to 1848, the role of France was decisive.
[ 92 ]
The era of the French Revolution and the subsequent Napoleonic wars was a difficult time for monarchs. Tsar Paul I of Russia  was
assassinated; King Louis XVI  of France was executed, as was his queen Marie Antoinette . Furthermore, kings Charles IV of Spain ,
Ferdinand VII of Spain  and Gustav IV Adolf of Sweden  were deposed as were ultimately the Emperor Napoleon and all of the
relatives he had installed on various European thrones. King Frederick William III of Prussia  and Emperor Francis II of Austria
barely clung to their thrones. King George III  of Great Britain lost the better part of the First British Empire.
[ 93 ]
The American Revolution  (1775–1783) was the first successful revolt of a colony against a European power. It rejected aristocracy
and established a republican form of government  that attracted worldwide attention.
[ 94 ]
 The French Revolution (1789–1804) was a
product of the same democratic forces in the Atlantic World  and had an even greater impact.
[ 95 ]
French historian François Aulard
says:
From the social point of view, the Revolution consisted in the suppression of what was called the feudal system, in the
Era of the French Revolution
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 24 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
The storming of the Bastille  in the French
Revolution of 1789
emancipation of the individual, in greater division of landed property, the abolition of the privileges of noble birth, the
establishment of equality, the simpliﬁcation of life.... The French Revolution differed from other revolutions in being not merely
national, for it aimed at beneﬁting all humanity."
[ 96 ]
French intervention in the American Revolutionary War  had nearly bankrupted the state.
After  repeated  failed  attempts  at  financial  reform,  King  Louis  XVI  had  to  convene  the
Estates-General , a representative body of the country made up of three estates: the clergy,
the nobility, and the commoners. The third estate, joined by members of the other two,
declared itself to be a National Assembly  and created, in July, the National  Constituent
Assembly . At the same time the people of Paris revolted, famously storming  the  Bastille
prison on 14 July 1789 .
At the time the assembly wanted to create a constitutional monarchy , and over the following
two years passed various laws including the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
Citizen , the abolition of feudalism , and a fundamental change  in the relationship between
France  and  Rome.  At  first  the  king  agreed  with  these  changes  and  enjoyed  reasonable
popularity with the people. As anti-royalism  increased along with threat of foreign invasion,
the king tried to flee and join France's enemies. He was captured and on 21 January 1793, having been convicted of treason, he was
guillotined.
On 20 September 1792 the National Convention  abolished the monarchy and declared France a republic. Due to the emergency of
war , t h e N a t i o n a l C o n v e n t i o n c r e a t e d t h e Committee  of  Public  Safety  to  act  as  the  country's  executive.  Under  Maximilien  de
Robespierre , the committee initiated the Reign of Terror , during which up to 40,000 people were executed in Paris, mainly nobles
and those convicted by the Revolutionary Tribunal , often on the flimsiest of evidence. Internal tensions at Paris drove the Committee
towards increasing assertions of radicalism and increasing suspicions. A few months into this phase, more and more prominent
revolutionaries were being sent to the guillotine by Robespierre and his faction, for example Madame Roland  and Georges Danton .
Elsewhere in the country, counter-revolutionary insurrections  were brutally suppressed. The regime was overthrown in the coup of 9
Thermidor  (27 July 1794) and Robespierre was executed. The regime which followed ended the Terror and relaxed Robespierre's
more extreme policies.
Napoleon  Bonaparte was France's most successful general in the Revolutionary wars. In 1799 on 18 Brumaire  (9 November) he
overthrew the government, replacing it with the Consulate , which he dominated. He gained popularity in France by restoring the
Church, keeping taxes low, centralizing power in Paris, and winning glory on the battlefield. In 1804 he crowned himself Emperor . In
Napoleon
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 25 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Napoleon's army at the retreat from
Russia at the Berezina  river
1805, Napoleon planned to invade Britain, but a renewed British alliance with Russia and Austria ( Third Coalition ), forced him to
turn his attention towards the continent, while at the same time the French fleet was demolished by the British at the Battle of
Trafalgar , ending any plan to invade Britain. On 2 December 1805, Napoleon defeated a numerically superior Austro-Russian army
at Austerlitz , forcing Austria's withdrawal from the coalition (see Treaty of Pressburg ) and dissolving the Holy Roman Empire . In
1806, a Fourth Coalition  was set up. On 14 October Napoleon defeated the Prussians at the Battle of Jena-Auerstedt , m a r c h e d
through Germany and defeated the Russians on 14 June 1807 at Friedland . The Treaties of Tilsit  divided Europe between France and
Russia and created the Duchy of Warsaw .
On 12 June 1812 Napoleon invaded Russia  with a Grande Armée  of nearly 700,000 troops.
After the measured victories at Smolensk  and Borodino  Napoleon occupied Moscow, only to
find it burned by the retreating Russian army. He was forced to withdraw. On the march back
his army was harassed by Cossacks , and suffered disease and starvation. Only 20,000 of his
men survived the campaign. By 1813 the tide had begun to turn from Napoleon. Having been
defeated by a seven nation army  at the Battle of Leipzig  in October 1813, he was forced to
abdicate after the Six Days' Campaign  and the occupation of Paris. Under the Treaty of
Fontainebleau he was exiled to the island of Elba . He returned to France on 1 March 1815
(see Hundred Days ), raised an army, but was finally defeated by a British and Prussian force
at the Battle of Waterloo  on 18 June 1815 and exiled to the small British island of Saint
Helena .
Andrew Roberts , an English popular historian, finds that the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars, from 1793 to 1815, caused 4
million deaths (of whom 1 million were civilians); 1.4 million were French.
[ 97 ]
Outside France the Revolution had a major impact. Its ideas became widespread. Roberts argues that Napoleon was responsible for
key ideas of the modern world, so that, "meritocracy, equality before the law , property rights , religious toleration , modern secular
education , sound finances, and so on-were protected, consolidated, codified, and geographically extended by Napoleon during his 16
years of power."
[ 98 ]
Furthermore, the  French  armies  in the  1790s  and  1800s  directly  overthrew  feudal  remains  in much  of  western Europe. They
liberalised property laws , ended seigneurial dues , abolished the guilds of merchants  and craftsmen  to facilitate entrepreneurship ,
legalised divorce, closed the Jewish ghettos  and made Jews equal to everyone else . The Inquisition  ended as did the Holy Roman
Empire . The power of church courts and religious authority was sharply reduced and equality under the law  was proclaimed for all
Impact of the French Revolution
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 26 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
The cumulative crises and disruptions of
Napoleon's invasion of Spain  led to the
independence  of most of Spain's American
colonies  (yellow) and the independence of
Brazil  (green).
men.
[ 99 ]
France conquered Belgium and turned it into another province of France. It conquered the Netherlands, and made it a client state . It
took control of the German areas on the left bank of the Rhine River  and set up a puppet Confederation of the Rhine . It conquered
Switzerland and most of Italy, setting up a series of puppet states. The result was glory and an infusion of much needed money from
the conquered lands. However the enemies of France, led by Britain, formed a Second Coalition  in 1799 (with Britain joined by
Russia, the Ottoman Empire and Austria). It scored a series of victories that rolled back French successes, and trapped the French
Army  in  Egypt.  Napoleon  slipped  through  the  British  blockade  in  October  1799,  returning  to  Paris,  where  he  overthrew  the
government and made himself the ruler.
[ 100 ] [ 101 ]
Napoleon conquered most of Italy in the name of the French Revolution in 1797–99. He split up Austria's holdings and set up a series
of new republics, complete with new codes of law and abolition of feudal privileges. Napoleon's Cisalpine Republic  was centered on
Milan; Genoa became a republic; the Roman Republic was formed as well as the small Ligurian Republic  around Genoa. The
Neapolitan Republic  was formed around Naples, but it lasted only five months. He later formed the Kingdom of Italy , with his
brother as King. In addition, France turned the Netherlands into the Batavian Republic , and Switzerland into the Helvetic Republic .
All these new countries were satellites of France, and had to pay large subsidies to Paris, as well as provide military support for
Napoleon's wars. Their political and administrative systems were modernized, the metric system introduced, and trade barriers
reduced. Jewish ghettos were abolished. Belgium and Piedmont became integral parts of France.
[ 102 ]
Most  of  the  new  nations  were  abolished  and  returned  to  prewar  owners  in  1814.
However, Artz emphasizes the benefits the Italians gained from the French Revolution:
For nearly two decades the Italians had excellent codes of law, a fair system of
taxation, a better economic situation, and more religious and intellectual toleration
than they had known for centuries.... Everywhere old physical, economic, and
intellectual barriers had been thrown down and the Italians had begun to be aware
of a common nationality.
[ 103 ]
Likewise  in  Switzerland  the  long-term  impact  of  the  French  Revolution  has  been
assessed by Martin:
It proclaimed the equality of citizens before the law, equality of languages, freedom
of thought and faith; it created a Swiss citizenship , basis of our modern nationality,
and the separation of powers, of which the old regime had no conception; it
suppressed internal tariffs and other economic restraints; it uniﬁed weights and measures, reformed civil and penal law,
authorized mixed marriages (between Catholics and Protestants), suppressed torture and improved justice; it developed
education and public works.
[ 104 ]
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 27 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Cheering the Revolutions of 1848  in
Berlin
The greatest impact came in France itself. In addition to effects similar to those in Italy and Switzerland, France saw the introduction
of the principle of legal equality, and the downgrading of the once powerful and rich Catholic Church . Power became centralized in
Paris, with its strong bureaucracy and an army supplied by conscripting all young men. French politics were permanently polarized –
new names were given, "left" and "right" for the supporters and opponents of the principles of the Revolution.
By the 19th century, governments increasingly took over traditional religious roles, paying much more attention to efficiency and
uniformity than to religiosity. Secular bodies took control of education away from the churches, abolished taxes and tithes for the
support of established religions , and excluded bishops from the upper houses. Secular laws increasingly regulated marriage and
divorce, and maintaining birth and death registers became the duty of local officials. Although the numerous religious denominations
in the United States  founded many colleges and universities, that was almost exclusively a state function across Europe. Imperial
powers protected Christian missionaries  in African and Asian colonies.
[ 105 ]
 In France and other largely Catholic nations, anti-clerical
political movements tried to reduce the role of the Catholic Church. Likewise briefly in Germany in the 1870s there was a fierce
Kulturkampf  (culture war) against Catholics , but the Catholics successfully fought back. The Catholic Church concentrated more
power in the papacy and fought against secularism  and socialism . It sponsored devotional reforms that gained wide support among
the churchgoers.
[ 106 ]
The political development of nationalism and the push for popular sovereignty  culminated
with the ethnic/national revolutions of Europe. During the 19th century nationalism became
one of the most significant political and social forces in history; it is typically listed among
the top causes of World War I .
[ 107 ] [ 108 ]
 Most European states had become constitutional
monarchies by 1871, and Germany and Italy merged many small city-states to become united
nation-states. Germany in particular increasingly dominated the continent in economics and
political power. Meanwhile, on a global scale, Great Britain, with its far-flung British Empire ,
unmatched Royal Navy, and powerful bankers, became the world's first global power. The
sun never set on its territories, while an informal empire operated through British financiers,
entrepreneurs, traders and engineers who established operations in many countries, and
largely  dominated  Latin  America.  The  British  were  especially  famous  for  financing  and
constructing railways around the world.
[ 109 ]
Napoleon's conquests of the German and Italian states around 1800–1806 played a major role in stimulating nationalism and
Religion
The rise of Nations
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 28 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Beginning in 1821, the Greek War of
Independence  began as a rebellion by
Greek revolutionaries against the ruling
Ottoman Empire.
demand for national unity.
[ 110 ]
In the German states east of Prussia Napoleon abolished many of the old or medieval relics, such as dissolving the Holy Roman
Empire  in 1806.
[ 111 ]
 He imposed rational legal systems and his organization of the Confederation of the Rhine  in 1806 promoted a
feeling of German nationalism . In the 1860s it was Prussian chancellor Otto von Bismarck  who achieved German unification in 1870
after the many smaller states followed Prussia's leadership in wars against Denmark, Austria and France.
[ 112 ]
Italian nationalism  emerged in the 19th century and was the driving force for Italian unification  or the "Risorgimento". It was the
political and intellectual movement that consolidated different states of the Italian Peninsula  into the single state of the Kingdom of
Italy  in 1860. The memory of the Risorgimento is central to both Italian nationalism and Italian historiography.
[ 113 ]
For centuries the Orthodox Christian Serbs  were ruled by the Muslim -controlled Ottoman
Empire . The success of the Serbian revolution  (1804–1817) against Ottoman rule  i n 1817
marked the foundation of modern Principality of Serbia . It achieved de facto  independence
in 1867 and finally gained recognition in the Berlin Congress  of 1878. The Serbs developed a
larger vision for nationalism in Pan-Slavism  and with Russian support sought to pull the
other Slavs out of the Austro-Hungarian Empire .
[ 114 ] [ 115 ]
 Austria, with German backing, tried
to crush Serbia in 1914 but Russia intervened, thus igniting the First World War  in which
Austria dissolved into nation states.
[ 116 ]
In 1918, the region of Vojvodina  proclaimed its secession  from Austria-Hungary to unite with
the pan-Slavic State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs ; the Kingdom of Serbia joined the union
on 1 December 1918, and the country was named Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes . It
was  renamed  Yugoslavia ,  which  was  never  able  to  tame  the  multiple  nationalities  and
religions and it flew apart in civil war  in the 1990s.
The Greek drive for independence from the Ottoman Empire inspired supporters across Christian Europe, especially in Britain.
Germany
Italy
Serbia
Greece
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 29 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Breakup of Yugoslavia
France, Russia and Britain intervened to make this nationalist dream become reality with the
Greek War of Independence  (1821-1829/1830).
[ 117 ]
Bulgarian  modern nationalism emerged under Ottoman rule  in the late 18th and early 19th
century. An autonomous Bulgarian Exarchate  was established in 1870/1872 for the diocese of
Bulgaria as well as for those, wherein at least two-thirds of Orthodox Christians  were willing
to join it. The April Uprising  in 1876 indirectly resulted in the re-establishment of Bulgaria in
1878 .
In the 1790s, Germany, Russia and Austria partitioned Poland . Napoleon set up the Duchy of
Warsaw , igniting a spirit of Polish nationalism . Russia took it over in 1815 as Congress Poland  with the tsar as King of Poland. Large-
scale nationalist revolts erupted in 1830  and 1863–64  but were harshly crushed by Russia, which tried to Russify  the Polish language ,
culture  and religion . The  collapse  of  the  Russian Empire  in the  First World  War enabled  the  major powers  to  reestablish  an
independent Second Polish Republic , which survived until 1939. Meanwhile, Poles in areas controlled by Germany moved into heavy
industry but their religion came under attack by Bismarck in the Kulturkampf of the 1870s. The Poles joined German Catholics in a
well-organized new Centre Party , and defeated Bismarck politically. He responded by stopping the harassment and cooperating with
the Centre Party.
[ 118 ] [ 119 ]
After the War of the Spanish Succession , the assimilation of the states of the Crown of Aragon , the kingdoms of Aragon , Valencia ,
Mallorca  and the Principality of Catalonia , by the Castilian Crown  through the Nueva Planta decrees  was the first step in the creation
of the Spanish nation state, through the imposition of the political and cultural characteristics of the dominant ethnic group, in this
case the Castilians, over those of other ethnic groups, who became national minorities  to be assimilated.
[ 120 ] [ 121 ]
 Since the political
unification of 1714, Spanish assimilation policies towards Catalan-speaking territories ( Catalonia , Valencia , the Balearic Islands , part
of Aragon ) and other national minorities have been a historical constant.
[ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ]
 The nationalization process accelerated in the
19th century, in parallel to the origin of Spanish nationalism , the social, political and ideological movement that tried to shape a
Spanish national identity based on the Castilian model, in conflict with the other historical nations of the State. These nationalist
policies, sometimes very aggressive,
[ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ]
 and still in force,
[ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ]
 are the seed of repeated territorial conflicts
within the State.
Bulgaria
Poland
Spain
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 30 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
School map of Spain from 1850. On it,
the state is shown divided into four parts:-
"Fully constitutional Spain", which
includes Castile and Andalusia, but also
the Galician-speaking territories. –
"Annexed or assimilated Spain": the
territories of the Crown of Aragon, the
larger part of which, with the exception of
Aragon proper, are Catalan-speaking-,
"Foral Spain", which includes Basque-
speaking territories-, and "Colonial
Spain", with the last overseas colonial
territories.
An important component of nationalism was the study of the nation's heritage, emphasizing
the  national  language  and  literary  culture.  This  stimulated,  and  was  in  turn  strongly
supported by, the emergence of national educational systems . Latin  gave way to the national
language, and compulsory education , with strong support from modernizers and the media,
became standard in Germany and eventually other West European nations. Voting reforms
extended the franchise. Every country developed a sense of national origins – the historical
accuracy was less important than the motivation toward patriotism. Universal compulsory
education  was extended to girls at the elementary level. By the 1890s, strong movements
emerged in some countries, including France, Germany and the United States, to extend
compulsory education to the secondary level.
[ 133 ] [ 134 ]
After the defeat of revolutionary France, the great powers tried to restore the situation which
existed before 1789. The 1815 Congress of Vienna  produced a peaceful balance of power
among the European empires, known as the Metternich  s y s t e m . T h e p o w e r b a s e o f t h e i r
support was the aristocracy.
[ 135 ]
 However, their reactionary efforts were unable to stop the
spread of revolutionary movements: the middle classes had been deeply influenced by the
ideals of the French revolution, and the Industrial Revolution brought important economical
and social changes.
[ 136 ]
Radical intellectuals looked to the working classes  for a base for socialist, communist and
anarchistic  ideas. Widely influential was the 1848 Communist Manifesto  by Karl Marx  and Friedrich Engels .
[ 137 ]
The  middle  classes  and  businessmen  promoted  liberalism,  free  trade  and  capitalism.  Aristocratic  elements  concentrated  in
government service, the military and the established churches. Nationalist movements (in Germany, Italy, Poland, Hungary, and
elsewhere) sought national unification and/or liberation from foreign rule. As a result, the period between 1815 and 1871 saw a large
number of revolutionary attempts and independence wars. Greece successfully revolted against Ottoman rule in the 1820s.
[ 138 ]
Napoleon III , nephew of Napoleon I, parlayed his famous name and to widespread popularity across France. He returned from exile
in 1848, promising to stabilize the chaotic political situation.
[ 139 ]
 He was elected president and maneuvered successfully to name
Education
Ideological coalitions
France under Napoleon III
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 31 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Mikhail Bakunin  speaking to
members of the International
Workingmen's Association  at the
Basel Congress  in 1869
Paris Commune , 1871
himself Emperor, a move approved later by a large majority of the French electorate. The first part
of his Imperial term brought many important reforms, facilitated by Napoleon's control of the
lawmaking body, the government, and the French Armed Forces . Hundreds of old Republican
leaders were arrested and deported. Napoleon controlled the media and censored the news. In
compensation  for  the  loss  of  freedom,  Napoleon  gave  the  people  new  hospitals  and  asylums,
beautified and modernized  Paris, and built a modern railroad and transportation system that
dramatically improved commerce. The economy grew, but industrialization was not as rapid as
Britain,  and  France  depended  largely  on  small  family-oriented  firms  as  opposed  to  the  large
companies that were emerging in the United States and Germany. France was on the winning side
in  the  Crimean  War  (1854–56),  but  after  1858  Napoleon's  foreign-policy  was  less  and  less
successful. Foreign-policy blunders finally destroyed his reign in 1870–71. His empire collapsed
after being defeated in the Franco-Prussian War .
[ 140 ] [ 141 ]
France became a republic, but until the 1880s there was a strong popular demand for monarchy.
Hostility to the Catholic Church  became  a  major  issue,  as  France  battle  between  secular  and
religious forces well into the 20th century, with the secular elements usually more successful. The
French Third Republic  emerged in 1871.
[ 142 ]
From his base in Prussia, Otto von Bismarck  i n t h e 1 8 6 0 s e n g i n e e r e d a s e r i e s o f s h o r t ,
decisive wars, that unified most of the German states  (excluding Austria) into a powerful
German Empire . By 1871 he used balance of power  diplomacy to preserve Germany's new
role  and  keep  Europe  at  peace.  The  new  German  Empire  industrialized  rapidly  and
challenged Britain for economic leadership. Bismarck was removed from office in 1890 by an
aggressive young Kaiser Wilhelm II , who pursued a disruptive foreign policy that polarized
Europe into rival camps. These rival camps went to war with each other in 1914.
[ 143 ] [ 144 ]
The power of nationalism to create new states was irresistible in the 19th century, and the
process could lead to collapse in the absence of a strong nationalism. Austria-Hungary  had the advantage of size and a large army,
but multiple disadvantages: rivals on four sides, unstable finances, a fragmented population, a thin industrial base, and minimal
naval resources. It did have the advantage of good diplomats, typified by Metternich . They employed a grand strategy for survival
Bismarck's Germany
Austrian and Russian empires
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 32 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Otto von Bismarck , Chancellor
of Germany
Scottish Highland family migrating to New
Zealand
that balanced out different forces, set up buffer zones, and kept the Hapsburg empire  going despite
wars with the Ottomans, Frederick the Great, Napoleon and Bismarck, until the First World War. The
Empire overnight disintegrated into multiple states based on ethnic nationalism and the principle of
self-determination.
[ 145 ]
Catherine the Great 's reforms caused the Russian Empire  to develop into a major European power.
[ 146 ]
 In the subsequent decades, Russia expanded in a variety of directions. Like the Austrian empire,
the Russian empire brought together a multitude of languages and cultures, so that its military defeat
in the First World War led to multiple splits that created independent Finland, Latvia, Lithuania,
Estonia, and Poland, and briefly independent Ukraine, Armenia, Georgia, and Azerbaijan.
[ 147 ]
 Russia
had a significant impact on the Balkans , Caucasus , and their peoples, including 12 Russo-Turkish
wars .
There was mass European emigration to the Americas , South Africa , Australia and New Zealand in
the 19th and 20th centuries, as a result of a dramatic demographic transition  in 19th-century Europe,
subsequent wars and political changes on the continent. From the end of the Napoleonic
Wars  in 1815 to the end of World War I  in 1918, millions of Europeans emigrated. Of these,
71% went to North America , 21% to Central  and South America  and 7% to Australia. About
11 million of these people went to Latin America, of whom 38% were Italians, 28% were
Spaniards and 11% were Portuguese.
[ 148 ]
Colonial empires  were the product of the European Age of Discovery  from the 15th century.
The initial impulse behind these dispersed maritime empires and those that followed was
trade. Both the Portuguese Empire  and Spanish Empire  quickly grew into the first global
political and economic systems with territories spread around the world.
Subsequent major European colonial empires included the French , Dutch , and British . The
latter, consolidated during the period of British maritime hegemony in the 19th century, became the largest empire in history
because of the improved ocean transportation technologies of the time as well as electronic communication. At its height in 1920, the
British Empire covered a quarter of the Earth's land area and comprised a quarter of its population. Other European countries, such
Emigration
Imperialism
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 33 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
The 1884 Berlin Conference  headed by
Otto von Bismarck  that regulated
European colonization in Africa during
the New Imperialism  period
Peugeot Type 3  built in France in 1891
as Belgium , Germany , and Italy , pursued colonial empires as well (mostly in Africa), but they
were smaller. Russia built its Russian Empire  through conquest by land in Eastern Europe,
and Asia.
By the mid-19th century, the Ottoman Empire  had declined. This instigated the Crimean War
in 1854 and began a tenser period of minor clashes among the globe-spanning empires of
Europe. In the second half of the 19th century, the Kingdom of Sardinia  and the Kingdom of
Prussia  carried out a series of wars that resulted in the creation of Italy and Germany as
nation-states, significantly changing the balance of power in Europe. From 1870, Otto von
Bismarck  engineered a German hegemony that put France in a critical situation. It slowly
rebuilt its relationships, seeking alliances with Russia and Britain to control the growing
power of Germany. In this way, two opposing sides – the Triple Alliance of 1882  (Germany,
Austria-Hungary and Italy) and the Triple Entente  of 1907 (Britain, France and Russia) –
formed in Europe, escalating military forces and alliances.
The years between the Franco-Prussian War  and World War I  were characterised by unusual
political stability in Western  and Central Europe . Although tensions between France and
Germany  persisted as a result of the French loss of Alsace-Lorraine  to Germany in 1871, a
series of diplomatic conferences managed to mediate disputes that threatened the general
peace: the Congress of Berlin  in 1878, the Berlin Congo Conference  in 1884, and the Algeciras
Conference  in 1906. Indeed, for many Europeans during the Belle Époque, transnational,
class-based  affiliations  were  as  important  as  national  identities,  particularly  among
aristocrats. An upper-class gentleman could travel through much of Western Europe without
a passport  and even reside abroad with minimal bureaucratic regulation.
[ 149 ]
The Belle Époque was an era of great scientific and technological advancement in Europe and
the world in general. Inventions of the Second Industrial Revolution  that became generally
common in this era include the perfection of lightly sprung, noiseless carriages  in a multitude of new fashionable forms, which were
superseded towards the end of the era by the automobile , which was for its first decade a luxurious experiment for the well-heeled.
[ 150 ]
 French automobile manufacturers such as Peugeot  were already pioneers in carriage manufacturing. Edouard Michelin  invented
removable pneumatic tires  for bicycles and automobiles in the 1890s. The scooter  and moped  are also Belle Époque inventions.
Belle Époque (1871–1914)
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 34 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Trenches and sand bags were defences
against machine guns and artillery on the
Western Front, 1914–1918.
Detail from William Orpen 's painting The Signing
of Peace in the Hall of Mirrors, Versailles, 28 June
1919 , showing the signing of the peace treaty by
a minor German ofﬁcial opposite to the
representatives of the winning powers
After the relative peace of most of the 19th century, the rivalry between European powers,
compounded by rising nationalism among ethnic groups, exploded in 1914, when World War
I started.
[ 151 ]
 Over 65 million European soldiers were mobilised from 1914 to 1918; 20 million
soldiers and civilians died.
[ 152 ]
 On one side were Germany, Austria-Hungary , the Ottoman
Empire  and Bulgaria (the Central Powers / Triple Alliance ), while on the other side stood
Serbia  and the Triple Entente (France, Britain and Russia), which were joined by Italy in
1915, Romania in 1916 and the United States in 1917. The Western Front  involved especially
brutal combat without any territorial gains by either side. Single battles like Verdun  and the
Somme  killed hundreds of thousands. Czarist Russia collapsed in the February Revolution  of
1917 and Germany claimed victory on the Eastern Front . After eight months of liberal rule ,
the October Revolution  brought Vladimir Lenin  and the Bolsheviks  to power, leading to the
creation of the Soviet Union. With American entry into the war  in 1917, and the failure of
Germany's  spring  1918  offensive ,  Germany  had  run  out  of  manpower.  Germany's  allies,
Austria-Hungary  and the Ottoman Empire , surrendered and dissolved, followed by Germany
on 11 November 1918.
[ 153 ] [ 154 ]
The world war was settled by the victors at the Paris Peace Conference, 1919 . T h e
major  decisions  were  the  creation  of  the  League  of  Nations ; p e a c e t r e a t i e s w i t h
defeated enemies, most notably the Treaty of Versailles  with Germany; the awarding
of German and Ottoman overseas possessions as "mandates" , chiefly to Britain and
France; and the drawing of new national boundaries to better reflect the forces of
nationalism.
[ 155 ] [ 156 ]
 Multiple nations were required to sign minority rights treaties .
[ 157 ]
 The Treaty of Versailles itself weakened Germany's military power  and placed full
blame  for  the  war  a n d costly  reparations  on  its  shoulders  –  the  humiliation  and
resentment in Germany was probably one of the causes of Nazi success and indirectly
a cause of World War II .
1914–1945: two world wars
World War I
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 35 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Adolf Hitler addressing the Reichstag on
23 March 1933
In the Treaty of Versailles  (1919) the winners recognised the new states ( Poland , Czechoslovakia , Hungary, Austria, Yugoslavia ,
Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania) created in central Europe from the defunct German, Austro-Hungarian and Russian empires,
based on national (ethnic) self-determination. It was a peaceful era with a few small wars before 1922 such as the Ukrainian–Soviet
War  (1917–1921) and the Polish–Soviet War  (1919–1921). Prosperity was widespread, and the major cities sponsored a youth culture
called the " Roaring Twenties " or " Jazz Age ".
[ 158 ]
The Allied victory in the First World War seemed to mark the triumph of liberalism . Historian Martin Blinkhorn argues that the
liberal themes were ascendant in terms of " cultural pluralism , religious and ethnic toleration, national self-determination , free-
market economics , representative  and responsible government , free trade , unionism , and the peaceful settlement of international
disputes through a new body, the League of Nations."
[ 159 ]
 However, as early as 1917, the emerging liberal order was being challenged
by the new communist movement . Communist revolts were beaten back everywhere else, but succeeded in Russia.
[ 160 ]
 Italy adopted
an authoritarian ideology known as fascism  in 1922. Authoritarian regimes replaced democracy in the 1930s in Nazi Germany ,
Portugal , Austria , Poland, Greece , the Baltic countries and Francoist Spain . By 1940, there were only four liberal democracies left on
the European continent: France , Finland, Switzerland and Sweden.
[ 161 ]
After the Wall Street crash of 1929 , most of the world sank into a Great Depression; prices
and profits fell and unemployment soared. The worst hit sectors included heavy industry,
export-oriented agriculture, mining and lumbering, and construction. World trade fell by
two-thirds.
[ 162 ] [ 163 ]
In most of Europe, many nations turned to dictators and authoritarian regimes. The most
momentous change of government came with Adolf Hitler's rise to power  in 1933. The main
institution that was meant to bring stability was the League of Nations , cr eat ed i n 19 19 .
However the League failed to resolve any major crises, undermined by the bellicosity of Nazi
Germany , the Empire of Japan , the Soviet Union and Fascist Italy , as well as the lack of
participation by the United States. By 1937 it was largely ignored.
[ 164 ]
Italy conquered Ethiopia  in 1931.
[ 165 ]
 The Spanish Civil War  (1936–1939) was won by the
rebels (the Nationalist faction ), led by Francisco Franco . The civil war did not escalate into a larger conflict, but did become a
worldwide ideological battleground that pitted the left, the communist movement and many liberals against Catholics, conservatives,
and fascists. Britain, France and the US remained neutral. Worldwide there was a decline in pacifism and a growing sense that
Interwar period
Great Depression: 1929–39
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 36 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Starving Jewish children in Warsaw
Ghetto  (1940–1943)
American and Soviet troops meet in April
1945 , east of the Elbe River
another world war was imminent.
[ 166 ]
In 1938 Adolf Hitler  annexed the Sudetenland . In the Munich Agreement , Britain and France
adopted  a  policy  of  appeasement ,  but  Germany  subsequently  took  over  the  rest  of
Czechoslovakia .  After  allying  with  Japan  in  the  Anti-Comintern  Pact  a n d t h e n a l s o w i t h
Benito Mussolini 's Italy in the " Pact of Steel ", and finally signing a non-aggression treaty  with
the Soviet Union in August 1939, Hitler launched the Second World War  on 1 September
1939 by attacking Poland . Britain and France declared war on Germany, but there was little
fighting during the " Phoney War " period. War began in earnest in spring 1940 with the
successful Blitzkrieg conquests of Denmark, Norway, the Low Countries, and France. Britain
defeated Germany's air attacks in the Battle of Britain . Hitler's goal was to control Eastern
Europe but the attack on the Soviet Union  was delayed until June 1941 and the Wehrmacht
was stopped close to Moscow in December 1941.
[ 167 ]
Over the next year the Germans started to suffer a series of defeats. War raged between the
Axis  Powers  (Germany,  Italy,  and  Japan)  and  the  Allied  Forces  (British  Empire,  Soviet
Union, and the United States). The Allied Forces won in North Africa, invaded Italy  in 1943,
and recaptured France  in 1944. In 1945 Germany itself was invaded from the east by the
Soviet  Union  a n d from  the  west  by  the  other  Allies .  As  the  Red  Army  conquered  the
Reichstag  in the Battle of Berlin , Hitler committed suicide  and Germany surrendered.
[ 168 ]
World War II was the deadliest conflict in human history, causing between 50 and 80 million
deaths , the majority of whom were civilians (approximately 38 to 55 million).
[ 169 ]
This period was also marked by systematic genocide. In 1942–45, separately from the war-
related  deaths,  the  Nazis  k i l l e d o v e r 1 1 m i l l i o n c i v i l i a n s identified  through  IBM-enabled
censuses , including the majority of the Jews  and Gypsies  of Europe, millions of Polish  and
Soviet  Slavs,  homosexuals,  Jehovah's  Witnesses ,  disabled  people,  and  political  enemies.
Meanwhile,  in  the  1930s  the  Soviet  system  of  forced  labour , expulsions  a n d allegedly
engineered famine  had a similar death toll. Millions of civilians were affected by forced population transfers.
[ 170 ]
World War II
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 37 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
East German construction workers
building the Berlin Wall, 20 November
1961
The world wars ended the pre-eminent position of Britain, France and Germany in Europe
and the world.
[ 171 ]
 At the Yalta Conference , Europe was divided into spheres of influence
between the victors of World War II, and soon became the principal zone of contention in the
Cold War  between the Western countries  and the Communist bloc . The United States and the
majority of European liberal democracies established the NATO  military alliance. Later, the
Soviet Union and its satellites in 1955 established the Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact had a
much  larger  ground  force,  but  the  American-French-British  nuclear  umbrellas  p r o t e c t e d
NATO.
Communist  states  w e r e i m p o s e d b y t h e R e d A r m y i n t h e E a s t , w h i l e p a r l i a m e n t a r y
democracy became dominant in the West. Most historians point to its success as the product
of exhaustion with war and dictatorship, and the promise of continued economic prosperity.
The United States gave away about $20 billion in Marshall Plan  grants and other funding to Western Europe, 1945 to 1951. Historian
Michael J. Hogan argues that American aid was critical in stabilizing the economy and politics of Western Europe. It brought in
modern management that dramatically increased productivity, and encouraged cooperation between labor and management, and
among states. Local Communist parties were opposed, and they lost prestige and influence and a role in government. In strategic
terms, says Hogan, the Marshall Plan strengthened the West against the possibility of a communist invasion or political takeover.
[ 172 ]
However, the Marshall Plan's role in the rapid recovery has been debated. Most reject the idea that it only miraculously revived
Europe, since the evidence shows that a general recovery was already under way. Economic historians Bradford De Long and Barry
Eichengreen  conclude:
It was not large enough to have signiﬁcantly accelerated recovery by ﬁnancing investment, aiding the reconstruction of
damaged infrastructure, or easing commodity bottlenecks. We argue, however, that the Marshall Plan did play a major role in
setting the stage for post-World War II Western Europe's rapid growth. The conditions attached to Marshall Plan aid pushed
European political economy in a direction that left its post World War II " mixed economies " with more "market" and less
"controls" in the mix.
[ 173 ]
The Soviet Union concentrated on its own recovery. It seized and transferred most of Germany's industrial plants and it exacted war
reparations  from East Germany, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria. It used trading arrangements deliberately designed to favor the
Cold War era
Economic recovery
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 38 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Marshall Plan dollar amounts
Soviet Union. Moscow controlled the Communist parties that ruled the
satellite states. Historian Mark Kramer concludes:
The net outﬂow of resources from eastern Europe to the Soviet
Union was approximately $15 billion to $20 billion in the ﬁrst decade
after World War II, an amount roughly equal to the total aid provided
by the United States to western Europe under the Marshall Plan.
[ 174 ]
Looking  at  the  half  century  after  the  war  historian  Walter  Lacquer
concluded:
"The postwar generations of European elites aimed to create more
democratic societies. They wanted to reduce the extremes of wealth
and poverty and provide essential social services in a way that
prewar generations had not. They had had quite enough of unrest
and conﬂict. For decades many Continental societies had more or
less achieved these aims and had every reason to be proud of their
progress. Europe was quiet and civilized. Europe's success was
based on recent painful experience: the horrors of two world wars;
the lessons of dictatorship; the experiences of fascism and
communism. Above all, it was based on a feeling of European
identity and common values – or so it appeared at the time."
[ 175 ]
The post-war period witnessed a significant rise in the standard of living of
the Western European working class.
[ 176 ]
Western Europe's industrial nations in the 1970s were hit by a global economic crisis . Causes included obsolescent heavy industry,
sudden high energy prices which caused sharp inflation, inefficient nationalized railways and heavy industries, lagging computer
technology , high government deficits  and growing unrest led by militant labour unions . Germany and Sweden sought to create a
social consensus behind a gradual restructuring. Germany's efforts proved highly successful. In Britain under the premiership of
Margaret Thatcher , the solution was shock therapy, high interest rates, austerity, and selling off inefficient corporations as well as the
public housing. One result was escalating social tensions in Britain. Thatcher eventually defeated her opponents and radically
changed the British economy , but controversy persisted.
[ 177 ]
Western Europe began economic and then political integration, with the aim to unite the region and defend it. This process included
Recent history
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 39 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Germans standing on top of the Berlin
Wall  at the Brandenburg Gate , November
1989; it would begin to be torn apart in
the following days.
Changes in national boundaries after the end of
the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet
Union  in 1991
organisations such as the European Coal and Steel Community  and the Council of Europe .
The Solidarność  movement in the 1980s weakened the Communist government in Poland . At
the  time  the  Soviet  leader  Mikhail  Gorbachev  i n i t i a t e d perestroika  a n d glasnost , w h i c h
weakened Soviet influence in Europe. In 1989 after the Pan-European Picnic  the Iron Curtain
and the Berlin Wall came down  and Communist governments outside the Soviet Union were
deposed. In 1990 the Federal Republic of Germany absorbed East Germany. In 1991 the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union  in Moscow collapsed, ending the USSR , which split
into fifteen independent states. The most violent dissolution happened in Yugoslavia. Four
out of six Yugoslav republics declared independence and for most of them a violent war
ensued,  in  some  parts  lasting  until  1995.  In  2006  Montenegro  seceded  and  became  an
independent state. Kosovo 's government unilaterally declared independence  from Serbia on
17 February 2008. The European Economic Community  pushed for closer integration, co-
operation  in  foreign  and  home  affairs,  and  started  to  increase  its  membership  into  the
neutral and former communist countries. In 1993, the Maastricht Treaty  established the
European Union , succeeding the EEC. The neutral countries of Austria, Finland and
Sweden  acceded  to  the  EU,  and  those  that  did  not  join  were  tied  into  the  EU's
economic market via the European Economic Area . These countries also entered the
Schengen Agreement  which lifted border controls between member states.
[ 178 ]
 The
euro  was created in 1999 and replaced all previous currencies in participating states in
2002, forming the eurozone .
The EU did not participate in the Yugoslav Wars , and was divided on supporting the
United States in the 2003–2011 Iraq War . NATO was part of the war in Afghanistan ,
but at a much lower level of involvement than the United States.
In the post–Cold War era , NATO and the EU have been gradually admitting most of
the former members of the Warsaw Pact. In 2004, the EU gained 10 new members .
( Estonia , Latvia , a n d Lithuania , w h i c h h a d b e e n p a r t o f t h e S o v i e t U n i o n ; Czech
Republic , Hungary, Poland, Slovakia , and Slovenia , five former-communist countries;
Malta ,  and  the  divided  island  of  Cyprus .)  These  were  followed  by  Bulgaria  and
Romania in 2007 . Russia's regime interpreted these expansions as violations against NATO's promise to not expand "one inch to the
east" in 1990.
[ 179 ]
 Russia engaged in bilateral disputes about gas supplies with Belarus  and Ukraine  which endangered the European
supply, and engaged in a war with Georgia  in 2008. Public opinion in the EU turned against enlargement, partially due to what was
seen as over-eager expansion including Turkey gaining candidate status. The European Constitution  was rejected in France and the
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 40 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Netherlands , and then (as the Treaty of Lisbon ) in Ireland, although a second vote passed in Ireland in 2009.
The 2008 financial crisis  and the Great Recession  affected Europe, and government responded with austerity . Limited ability  of the
smaller  EU  nations  (most  notably  Greece )  to  handle  their  debts  led  to  social  unrest  including  the  anti-austerity  movement ,
government liquidation, and financial insolvency. In May 2010, the German parliament agreed to loan 22.4 billion euros to Greece
over three years, with the stipulation that Greece follow strict austerity measures. See European sovereign-debt crisis .
Beginning in 2014, Ukraine  has been in a state of revolution  and unrest. On 16 March, a disputed referendum  was held in Crimea
leading to the de facto  secession of Crimea and its largely internationally unrecognized annexation  to the Russian Federation.
In June 2016, in a referendum in the United Kingdom  on the country's membership in the European Union , 52% of voters voted to
leave the EU, leading to the complex Brexit  separation process and negotiations, which led to political and economic changes  for both
the UK and the remaining European Union countries. The UK left the EU on 31 January 2020. Later that year, Europe was affected
by the COVID-19 pandemic .
According to the Wall Street Journal  in 2021 as Angela Merkel  stepped down as Chancellor of Germany  after 16 years:
Ms. Merkel leaves in her wake a weakened Europe, a region whose aspirations to act as a third superpower  have come to
seem ever more unrealistic. When she became chancellor in 2005, the EU was at a high point: It had adopted the euro ,
which was meant to rival the dollar  as a global currency , and had just expanded by absorbing former members of the
Soviet bloc . Today’s EU, by contrast, is geographically and economically diminished. Having lost the U.K. because of
Brexit , it faces deep political and cultural divisions, lags behind in the global race for innovation and technology and is
increasingly squeezed by the mounting U.S.-China strategic rivalry . Europe has endured thanks in part to Ms. Merkel’s
pragmatic stewardship, but it has been battered by crises during her entire time in office.
[ 180 ]
Russia began an invasion of Ukraine  on 24 February 2022, in a major escalation of the Russo-Ukrainian War  that began in 2014. It is
the largest conventional military attack  in Europe since World War II.
[ 181 ] [ 182 ] [ 183 ]
▪ 7000 BC: Neolithic  in Europe begins.
▪ 4600 – 4200 BC: First European proto-civilisation, ﬁrst golden artefacts and ﬁrst fortiﬁed stone town – the Varna culture .
[ 6 ] [ 184 ]
[ 185 ] [ 186 ] [ 187 ] [ 188 ]
Chronology
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 41 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
▪ 5000 – 3500 BC: First European proto-script – the Old European script  (Danubian script).
[ 189 ] [ 190 ] [ 191 ]
▪ 3850 – 3600 BC: Malta's Temple  period begins.
▪ 3500 BC: First European civilization, Minoan civilization , begins on Crete.
▪ 3000 BC: Indo-Europeans  begin a large-scale settlement of the continent.
▪ 2500 BC: Stonehenge  is constructed.
▪ 2100 BC: First European script, Cretan hieroglyphs , is invented by Minoans.
▪ 1750 BC: Mycenaean civilization  begins.
▪ 1600 BC: Thera eruption  occurs on the island of Santorini , destructing the Minoan city of Thera .
▪ 1450 BC: Crete  is conquered by Mycenaeans .
▪ 1200 BC: Late Bronze Age collapse  begins, that may be seen in the context of a technological history that saw the slow spread
of ironworking  technology from present-day Bulgaria and Romania  in the 13th and the 12th centuries BC.
[ 17 ]
▪ 1100 BC: Minoan civilization  falls.
▪ 1050 BC: Mycenaean civilization  falls after a period of palace destruction, marking the beginning of Greek Dark Ages .
▪ 900 BC: Etruscan civilization  begins.
▪ 800 BC: Greek Dark Ages  end, marking the beginning of classical antiquity .
▪ 753 BC: Traditional year of founding of Rome.
▪ 700 BC: Homer  composes The Iliad , an epic poem that represents the ﬁrst extended work of European literature.
▪ 509 BC: Roman Republic  is created.
▪ 499 BC: Greco-Persian Wars  begin.
▪ c.  480  BC: The Thracian Odrysian kingdom  was founded as the most important Daco-Thracian state  union.
[ 192 ]
▪ 449 BC: End of Greco-Persian Wars  with Greeks defeating Achaemid Empire .
▪ 440 BC: Herodotus  defends Athenian political freedom  in the Histories .
▪ 404 BC: Sparta  wins the Peloponnesian War .
▪ 323 BC: Alexander the Great  dies and his Macedonian Empire  (reaching far into Asia) fragments.
▪ 264 BC: Punic Wars  begin.
▪ 146 BC: Punic Wars  end with destruction of Carthage .
▪ 48 BC: Julius Caesar  crosses the Rubicon river, marking the beginning of a civil war.
▪ 44 BC: Julius Caesar is murdered . The Roman Republic  enters its terminal crisis.
▪ 27 BC: Establishment of the Roman Empire under Octavian .
AD
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 42 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
▪ 14 AD: Octavian  dies.
▪ 30 or 33 AD: Jesus , a popular religious  leader, is cruciﬁed .
▪ 45–55 (ca): First Christian  congregations in mainland Greece and in Rome.
▪ 68: First Roman imperial dynasty, Julio-Claudian , ends with suicide of Nero .
▪ 79: Eruption of Vesuvius  occurs, burying the cities of Pompeii , Herculaneum  and Stabiae  under the ashes.
▪ 117: Roman Empire reaches its territorial peak.
▪ 166: Antonine Plague  begins.
▪ 293: Diocletian  reorganizes the Empire by creating the Tetrarchy .
▪ 313: Constantine  ofﬁcially recognises Christianity, marking the end of the persecution of Christians.
▪ 330: Constantine  makes Constantinople  into his capital, a new Rome .
▪ 370: Huns  ﬁrst enter Europe.
▪ 395: Following the death of Theodosius I , the Empire is permanently split into the Eastern Roman Empire  (later Byzantium) and
the Western Roman Empire .
▪ 476: Odoacer  captures Ravenna  and deposes the last Roman emperor in the west: traditionally seen as the end date of the
Western Roman Empire .
▪ 527: Justinian I  is crowned  emperor of Byzantium . Orders the editing of Corpus Juris Civilis , Digest (Roman law) .
▪ 597: Beginning of Roman Catholic Christianization of Anglo-Saxon England  (missions and churches had been in existence well
before this date, but their contacts with Rome had been loose or nonexistent)
▪ 600: Saint Columbanus  uses the term "Europe" in a letter.
▪ 655: Jus patronatus .
▪ 681: Khan Asparukh  leads the Bulgars  and in a union with the numerous local Slavs  invades the Byzantine Empire in the Battle
of Ongal , creating Bulgaria .
▪ 718: Tervel of Bulgaria  helps the Byzantine Empire stop the Arabic invasion of Europe, and breaks the siege of Constantinople .
▪ 722: Battle of Covadonga  in the Iberian Peninsula. Pelayo , a noble Visigoth, defeats a Muslim army that tried to conquer the
Cantabrian coast. This helps establish the Christian Kingdom of Asturias , and marks the beginning of the Reconquista.
▪ 732: At the Battle of Tours , the Franks stop the advance of the Arabs into Europe.
▪ 800: Coronation of Charlemagne  as Holy Roman Emperor .
▪ 813: Third Council of Tours: Priests are ordered to preach in the native language of the population .
▪ 843: Treaty of Verdun .
▪ 863: Saints Cyril and Methodius  arrive in Great Moravia , initiating Christian mission among the Slav peoples.
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 43 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
▪ 864: Boris I of Bulgaria ofﬁcially baptises the whole nation , converting the non-Christian population from Tengrism , Slavic  and
other paganism to Christianity , and ofﬁcially founding the Bulgarian Church
▪ 872: Uniﬁcation of Norway .
▪ 886: Bulgarian  students of Cyril and Methodius  – Saint Sava , Kliment , Naum , Gorazd  and Angelar – arrive back to Bulgaria ,
creating the Preslav  and Ohrid  Literary Schools.
▪ 893: The Cyrillic alphabet , developed during the 9th century AD at the Preslav Literary School  in the First Bulgarian Empire ,
becomes the ofﬁcial Bulgarian alphabet .
▪ 895: Hungarian people  led by Árpád  start to settle in the Carpathian Basin .
▪ 917: In the Battle of Achelous (917)  Bulgaria defeats the Byzantine Empire, and Simeon I of Bulgaria  is proclaimed as emperor,
thus Bulgaria  becomes an empire .
▪ 962: Otto I  of East Francia  is crowned as "Emperor" by the Pope, beginning the Holy Roman Empire .
▪ 988 Kievan Rus  adopts Christianity, often seen as the origin of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine , the Ukrainian Greek Catholic
Church , and the Russian Orthodox Church .
▪ 1054: Start of the East–West Schism , which divides the Christian church for centuries.
▪ 1066: Successful Norman Invasion  of England by William the Conqueror .
▪ 1095: Pope Urban II  calls for the First Crusade .
▪ 12th century: The 12th century in literature  saw an increase in the number of texts. The Renaissance of the 12th century  occurs.
▪ 1128: Battle of São Mamede , formation of Portuguese sovereignty.
▪ 1131: Birth of the Kingdom of Sicily
▪ 1185: Bulgarian  sovereignty was reestablished with the anti-Byzantine uprising of the Bulgarians and Vlachs
▪ 1250: Death of emperor Frederick II ; end of effective ability of emperors to exercise control in Italy.
▪ 1303: The period of the Crusades  is over.
▪ 1309–1378: The Avignon Papacy
▪ 1315–1317: The Great Famine of 1315–1317  in Northern Europe
▪ 1341: Petrarch , the "Father of Humanism ", becomes the ﬁrst poet laureate  since antiquity.
▪ 1337–1453: The Hundred Years' War  between England and France.
▪ 1348–1351: Black Death  kills about one-third of Europe's population.
▪ 1439: Johannes Gutenberg  invents ﬁrst movable type  and the ﬁrst printing press  for books, starting the Printing Revolution .
▪ 1453: Fall of Constantinople  to the Ottoman Turks .
▪ 1487: The Wars of the Roses  end.
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 44 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
▪ 1492: The Reconquista  ends in the Iberian Peninsula . A Spanish expeditionary group, commanded by Christopher Columbus ,
lands in the New World .
▪ 1497: Vasco da Gama  departs to India starting direct trade with Asia.
▪ 1498: Leonardo da Vinci  paints The Last Supper  in Milan as the Renaissance  ﬂourishes.
▪ 1508: Maximilian I  the last ruling " King of the Romans " and the ﬁrst "elected Emperor of the Romans".
▪ 1517: Martin Luther  nails his 95 theses  on indulgences to the door of the church  in Wittenberg , triggering discussions which
would soon lead to the Reformation
▪ 1519: Ferdinand Magellan  and Juan Sebastián Elcano  begin ﬁrst global circumnavigation. Their expedition returns in 1522.
▪ 1519: Hernán Cortés  begins conquest of Mexico for Spain.
▪ 1532: Francisco Pizarro  begins the conquest of Peru (the Inca Empire ) for Spain.
▪ 1543: Nicolaus Copernicus  publishes De revolutionibus orbium coelestium  (On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres) .
▪ 1547: The Grand Duchy of Moscow  becomes the Tsardom of Russia .
▪ 1582: The introduction of the Gregorian calendar ; Russia refuses to adopt it until 1918.
▪ 1610: Galileo Galilei  uses his telescope to discover the moons of Jupiter .
▪ 1618: The Thirty Years' War  brings massive devastation to central Europe.
▪ 1648: The Peace of Westphalia  ends the Thirty Years' War, and introduces the principle of the integrity of the nation state.
▪ 1687: Isaac Newton  publishes Principia Mathematica , having a profound impact on The Enlightenment .
▪ 1699: Treaty of Karlowitz  concludes the Austro-Ottoman War . This marks the end of Ottoman control of Central Europe and the
beginning of Ottoman stagnation, establishing the Habsburg monarchy as the dominant power in Central and Southeastern
Europe.
▪ 1700: Outbreak of the War of the Spanish Succession  and the Great Northern War . The ﬁrst would check the aspirations of Louis
XIV , king of France to dominate European affairs; the second would lead to Russia's emergence as a great power and a
recognizably European state.
▪ 18th century: Age of Enlightenment  spurs an intellectual renaissance across Europe.
▪ 1707: The Kingdom of Great Britain  is formed by the union of the Kingdom of England  and the Kingdom of Scotland .
▪ 1712: Thomas Newcomen  invents ﬁrst practical steam engine which begins Industrial Revolution in Britain.
▪ 1721: Foundation of the Russian Empire .
▪ 1775: James Watt  invents a new efﬁcient steam engine accelerating the Industrial Revolution in Britain.
▪ 1776: Adam Smith  publishes The Wealth of Nations .
▪ 1784: Immanuel Kant  publishes Answering the Question: What Is Enlightenment? .
▪ 1789: Beginning of the French Revolution  and end of the absolute monarchy in France.
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 45 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
▪ 1792–1802: French Revolutionary Wars .
▪ 1799: Napoleon comes to power , eventually consolidating his position as Emperor of the French .
▪ 1803–1815: Napoleonic Wars  end in defeat of Napoleon.
▪ 1806: Napoleon abolishes the Holy Roman Empire .
▪ 1814–1815: Congress of Vienna ; Treaty of Vienna; France is reduced to 1789 boundaries; Reactionary forces dominate across
Europe.
▪ 1825: George Stephenson  opens the Stockton and Darlington Railway  the ﬁrst steam train railway for passenger trafﬁc in the
world.
▪ 1830: The southern provinces secede from the United Kingdom of the Netherlands  in the Belgian Revolution .
▪ 1836: Louis Daguerre  invents ﬁrst practical photographic method, in effect the ﬁrst camera.
▪ 1838: SS  Great Western , the ﬁrst steamship built for regularly scheduled transatlantic crossings enters service.
▪ 1848: Revolutions of 1848  and publication of The Communist Manifesto .
▪ 1852: Start of the Crimean War , which ends in 1855 in a defeat for Russia.
▪ 1859: Charles Darwin  publishes On the Origin of Species .
▪ 1861: Uniﬁcation of Italy  after victories by Giuseppe Garibaldi .
▪ 1866: First commercially successful transatlantic telegraph cable  is completed.
▪ 1860s: Russia emancipates its serfs  and Karl Marx  completes the ﬁrst volume of Das Kapital .
▪ 1870: Franco-Prussian War  and the fall of the Second French Empire .
▪ 1871: Uniﬁcation of Germany  under the direction of Otto von Bismarck .
▪ 1873: Panic of 1873  occurs. The Long Depression  begins.
▪ 1878: Re-establishment of Bulgaria , independence of Serbia , Montenegro  and Romania
▪ 1884: First permanent citywide electrical tram  system in Europe (in Brighton ).
▪ 1885: Karl Benz  invents Benz Patent-Motorwagen , the world's ﬁrst automobile.
▪ 1895: Auguste and Louis Lumière  begin exhibitions of projected ﬁlms before the paying public with their cinematograph , a
portable camera, printer, and projector.
▪ 1902: Guglielmo Marconi  sends ﬁrst transatlantic radio transmission.
▪ 1914: Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria  is assassinated  in Sarajevo ; World War I  begins a month later.
▪ 1917: Vladimir Lenin  and the Bolsheviks  seize power in the Russian Revolution . The ensuing Russian Civil War  lasts until 1922.
▪ 1918: World War I ends with the defeat of Germany and the Central Powers. Ten million soldiers killed; collapse of Russian,
German, Austrian, and Ottoman empires.
▪ 1918: Collapse of the German Empire and monarchic system; founding of Weimar Republic .
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 46 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
▪ 1918: Worldwide Spanish ﬂu epidemic kills millions in Europe.
▪ 1918: Austro-Hungarian Empire dissolves.
▪ 1919: Versailles Treaty  strips Germany of its colonies, several provinces and its navy and air force; limits army; Allies occupy
western areas; reparations ordered.
▪ 1920: League of Nations  begins operations; largely ineffective; defunct by 1939.
▪ 1921–22: Ireland divided; Irish Free State becomes independent and civil war erupts.
▪ 1922: Benito Mussolini  and the Fascists  take power in Italy.
▪ 1929: Worldwide Great Depression  begins with stock market crash  in New York City.
▪ 1933: Adolf Hitler  and the Nazis  take power in Germany.
▪ 1935: Italy conquers Ethiopia; League sanctions are ineffective.
▪ 1936: Start of the Spanish Civil War ; ends in 1939 with victory of Nationalists who are aided by Germany and Italy.
▪ 1938: Germany escalates the persecution of Jews with Kristallnacht .
▪ 1938: Appeasement  of Germany by Britain and France; Munich Agreement  splits Czechoslovakia ; Germany seized the
remainder in 1939.
▪ 1939: Britain and France hurriedly rearm; failed to arrange treaty with USSR.
▪ 1939: Adolf Hitler  and Joseph Stalin  agree partition of Eastern Europe in Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact .
▪ 1939: Nazi Germany invades Poland , starting the Second World War .
▪ 1940: Great Britain under Winston Churchill  becomes the last nation to hold out against the Nazis after winning the Battle of
Britain .
▪ 1941: U.S. begins large-scale lend-lease  aid to Britain, Free France, the USSR and other Allies ; Canada also provides ﬁnancial
aid.
▪ 1941: Germany invades the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa ; fails to capture Moscow or Leningrad.
▪ 1942: Adolf Hitler  and Nazi Germany  commence the Holocaust  – a Final Solution , with the murder of 6 million Jews.
▪ 1943: After Stalingrad  and Kursk , Soviet forces begin recapturing Nazi-occupied territory in the East.
▪ 1944: U.S., British and Canadian armed forces invade Nazi-occupied France  at Normandy .
▪ 1945: Hitler commits suicide , Mussolini is executed. World War II ends with Europe in ruins and Germany defeated.
▪ 1945: United Nations  formed.
▪ 1947: The British Empire  begins a process of voluntarily dismantling with the granting of independence to India and Pakistan.
▪ 1947: Cold War  begins as Europe is polarized East versus West.
▪ 1948–1951: U.S. provides large sums to rebuild Western Europe through the Marshall Plan ; stimulates large-scale modernization
of European industries and reduction of trade restrictions.
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 47 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
▪ 1949: The NATO  alliance is established.
▪ 1950: The Schuman Declaration  begins the process of European integration .
▪ 1954: The French Empire  begins to be dismantled; Withdraws from Vietnam.
▪ 1955: USSR creates a rival military coalition to the NATO , the Warsaw Pact .
▪ 1956: Suez Crisis  signals the end of the effective power of the British Empire.
▪ 1956: Hungarian Uprising  defeated by Soviet military forces.
▪ 1957: Treaties of Rome  establish the European Economic Community  from 1958.
▪ 1962: The Second Vatican Council  opens and begins a period of reform in the Catholic Church
▪ 1968: The May 1968 events in France  lead France to the brink of revolution.
▪ 1968: The Prague Spring  is defeated by Warsaw Pact military forces . The Club of Rome  is founded.
▪ 1973: Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom join the European Communities .
▪ 1980: The Solidarność  movement under Lech Wałęsa  begins open, overground opposition to the Communist rule in Poland.
▪ 1981: Greece joins  the European Communities.
▪ 1985: Mikhail Gorbachev  becomes leader of the Soviet Union and begins reforms  which inadvertently leads to the fall of
Communism and the Soviet Union.
▪ 1986: Portugal and Spain join the European Communities .
▪ 1986: Chernobyl disaster  occurs, the worst nuclear disaster in history.
▪ 1989: Communism overthrown  in all the Warsaw Pact  countries except the Soviet Union. Fall of the Berlin Wall  (opening of
unrestrained border crossings between east and west, which effectively deprived the wall of any relevance).
▪ 1990: Reuniﬁcation of Germany .
▪ 1991: Breakup of Yugoslavia  and the beginning of the Yugoslav Wars .
▪ 1991: Dissolution of the Soviet Union  and the creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States .
▪ 1993: Maastricht Treaty  establishes the European Union .
▪ 1995: Austria, Finland and Sweden join the European Union .
▪ 1997–99: End of European colonial empires in Asia  with the handover of Hong Kong  and Macau  to China.
▪ 2004: Slovenia, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Cyprus and Malta join the European
Union .
▪ 2007: Bulgaria and Romania join the European Union .
▪ 2008: The Great Recession  begins. Unemployment rises in some parts of Europe.
▪ 2013: Croatia joins  the European Union.
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 48 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
▪ 2014: Revolution of Dignity  in Ukraine and the beginning of the Russo-Ukrainian War .
▪ 2015: European migrant crisis  starts.
▪ 2020: The United Kingdom leaves the European Union .
▪ 2020-2023: COVID-19 pandemic in Europe , countries with the most cases are Russia, the United Kingdom, France, Spain, and
Italy.
▪ 2022: Russian invasion of Ukraine  opens with some of the most intense combat operations in Europe since the end of the Cold
War.
▪ 2023: Finland joins NATO .
▪ 2024: Sweden joins NATO .
▪ Genetic history of Europe
▪ History of the Balkans
▪ History of the Mediterranean region
▪ History of the Romani people
▪ History of Western civilization
▪ List of history journals § Europe
▪ List of largest European cities in history
▪ List of predecessors of sovereign states in Europe
▪ List of sovereign states by date of formation § Europe
▪ Major explorations after the Age of Discovery
▪ Timeline of European Union history
See also
References
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 49 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
1. Smith, Felisa A.; et al. (20 April 2018). "Body size
downgrading of mammals over the late Quaternary"  ( https://d
oi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.aao5987 ) . Science . 360  (6386):
310– 313. Bibcode : 2018Sci...360..310S  ( https://ui.adsabs.har
vard.edu/abs/2018Sci...360..310S ) . doi : 10.1126/
science.aao5987  ( https://doi.org/10.1126%2Fscience.aao598
7 ) . PMID 29674591  ( https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/296745
91 ) .
2. " "Kozarnika" cave"  ( https://web.archive.org/web/2016091517
0614/http://vdcci.bg/kiosk/index.php?option=com_content&vi
ew=article&id=54:kozarnika-cave&catid=14:nature&Itemid=1
27&lang=en ) . VDCCI BG. Archived from the original  ( http://vd
cci.bg/kiosk/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id
=54:kozarnika-cave&catid=14:nature&Itemid=127&lang=en )
on 15 September 2016 . Retrieved 5 September  2016 .
3. "Early human marks are "symbols" "  ( http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/
hi/science/nature/3512470.stm ) . BBC News . 16 March 2004 .
Retrieved 5 September  2016 .
4. "When the First Farmers Arrived in Europe, Inequality
Evolved"  ( https://www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article/when-th
e-ﬁrst-farmers-arrived-in-europe-inequality-evolved/ ) .
Scientiﬁc American . 1 July 2020. Archived  ( https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20220525055649/https://www.scientiﬁcamerican.c
om/article/when-the-ﬁrst-farmers-arrived-in-europe-inequality-
evolved/ )  from the original on 25 May 2022 . Retrieved
17 September  2022 .
5. Squires, Nick (31 October 2012). "Archaeologists ﬁnd
Europe's most prehistoric town"  ( https://www.telegraph.co.uk/
news/worldnews/europe/bulgaria/9646541/Bulgaria-archaeol
ogists-ﬁnd-Europes-most-prehistoric-town-Provadia-Solnitsat
a.html ) . The Daily Telegraph . Archived  ( https://ghostarchive.o
rg/archive/20220112/https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/world
news/europe/bulgaria/9646541/Bulgaria-archaeologists-ﬁnd-
Europes-most-prehistoric-town-Provadia-Solnitsata.html )
from the original on 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 1 November
2012 .
6. Maugh, Thomas H. II (1 November 2012). "Bulgarians ﬁnd
oldest European town, a salt production center"  ( https://www.l
atimes.com/science/la-xpm-2012-nov-01-la-sci-sn-oldest-eur
opean-town-20121101-story.html ) . Los Angeles Times .
Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20190504234136/http
s://www.latimes.com/science/la-xpm-2012-nov-01-la-sci-sn-ol
dest-european-town-20121101-story.html )  from the original
on 4 May 2019 . Retrieved 1 November  2012 .
7. "Ancient Crete"  ( http://oxfordbibliographiesonline.com/displa
y/id/obo-9780195389661-0071 ) .
Oxfordbibliographiesonline.com. 15 February 2010. Archived
( https://web.archive.org/web/20200530225110/https://www.ox
fordbibliographies.com/view/document/obo-9780195389661/
obo-9780195389661-0071.xml )  from the original on 30 May
2020 . Retrieved 17 May  2012 .
8. Hammond, N.G.L. (1976). Migrations and invasions in
Greece and adjacent areas  ( https://books.google.com/book
s?id=O9saAAAAYAAJ&q=%22Moreover%2C+in+this+area+a
+small+tholos-tomb+with+Mycenaean+pottery+of+III+B+style
+and+a+Mycenaean+acropolis+have+been+reported+at+Kip
eri+near+Parga%2C+and+another+Mycenaean+acropolis+la
y+above+the+Oracle+of+the+Dead+on+the+hill+called+%2
2 ) . Park Ridge, NJ: Noyes P. p. 139.
ISBN   978-0-8155-5047-1 . Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/
web/20230427155343/https://books.google.com/books?id=O
9saAAAAYAAJ&q=%22Moreover%2C+in+this+area+a+small
+tholos-tomb+with+Mycenaean+pottery+of+III+B+style+and
+a+Mycenaean+acropolis+have+been+reported+at+Kiperi+n
ear+Parga%2C+and+another+Mycenaean+acropolis+lay+ab
ove+the+Oracle+of+the+Dead+on+the+hill+called+%22 )
from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 6 November
2020 .
9. Tandy, p. xii. "Figure 1: Map of Epirus showing the locations
of known sites with Mycenaean remains"; Tandy, p. 2. "The
strongest evidence for Mycenaean presence in Epirus is
found in the coastal zone of the lower Acheron River, which
in antiquity emptied into a bay on the Ionian coast known
from ancient sources as Glykys Limin  (Figure 2-A)."
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 50 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
10. Borza, Eugene N. (1990). In the shadow of Olympus : the
emergence of Macedon  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=
614pd07OtfQC&q=%22The+existence+of+a+Late+Bronze+A
ge+Mycenaean+settlement+in+the+Petra+not+only+conﬁrms
+its+importance+as+a+route+from+an+early+period%2C+bu
t+also+extends+the+limits+of+Mycenaean+settlement+to+th
e+Macedonian+frontier.%22&pg=PA64 )  ([Nachdr.] ed.).
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. p. 64.
ISBN 978-0-691-00880-6 . Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/
web/20230427155354/https://books.google.com/books?id=6
14pd07OtfQC&q=%22The+existence+of+a+Late+Bronze+Ag
e+Mycenaean+settlement+in+the+Petra+not+only+conﬁrms
+its+importance+as+a+route+from+an+early+period%2C+bu
t+also+extends+the+limits+of+Mycenaean+settlement+to+th
e+Macedonian+frontier.%22&pg=PA64 )  from the original on
27 April 2023 . Retrieved 6 November  2020 .
11. "Aegeobalkan Prehistory – Mycenaean Sites"  ( http://aegeoba
lkanprehistory.net/img_articles/thumbs/tmb_75.jpg ) . Archived
( https://web.archive.org/web/20150903230427/http://aegeoba
lkanprehistory.net/img_articles/thumbs/tmb_75.jpg )  from the
original on 3 September 2015 . Retrieved 17 May  2012 .
12. The Synchronisation of Civilisations in the eastern
Mediterranean in the Second Millennium BC III, Proceedings
of the SCIEM 2000 – 2nd EuroConference, Vienna, 28 May –
1 June 2003
13. Use and appreciation of Mycenaean pottery in the Levant,
Cyprus and Italy  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=q4eYE
G2FW28C&q=mycenaean+in+italy ) Archived  ( https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20230427155344/https://books.google.com/boo
ks?id=q4eYEG2FW28C&q=mycenaean+in+italy )  27 April
2023 at the Wayback Machine , Gert Jan van Wijngaarden,
Amsterdam Archaeological Studies
14. The Mycenaeans and Italy: the archaeological and
archaeometric ceramic evidence  ( https://web.archive.org/we
b/20090822030452/http://www.gla.ac.uk/departments/archae
ology/research/projects/mycenaeansitaly/ ) , University of
Glasgow, Department of Archaeology
15. Emilio Peruzzi, Mycenaeans in early Latium , (Incunabula
Graeca 75), Edizioni dell'Ateneo & Bizzarri, Roma, 1980
16. Cline, Eric H. (2014). 177 B.C. the year civilization collapsed .
Princeton University Press. pp. xx + 237.
ISBN 978-0-691-14089-6 .
17. See A. Stoia and the other essays in M.L. Stig Sørensen and
R. Thomas, eds., The Bronze Age: Iron Age Transition in
Europe  (Oxford) 1989, and T.A. Wertime  and J.D. Muhly, The
Coming of the Age of Iron  (New Haven) 1980.
18. "Barbarian Europe and Early Iron Age Greece"  ( https://www.r
esearchgate.net/publication/276372928 ) .
19. Gruen, E. (2010). Rethinking the Other in Antiquity  ( https://do
i.org/10.1515/9781400836550 ) . Princeton University Press.
doi : 10.1515/9781400836550  ( https://doi.org/10.1515%2F978
1400836550 ) . ISBN 9781400836550 .
20. McLaughlin, Raoul (11 September 2014). The Roman Empire
and the Indian Ocean: The Ancient World Economy and the
Kingdoms of Africa, Arabia and India . Pen & Sword .
ISBN 9781473840959 .
21. McLaughlin, Raoul (11 November 2016). The Roman Empire
and the Silk Routes: The Ancient World Economy & the
Empires of Parthia, Central Asia & Han China . Pen & Sword .
ISBN 9781473889811 .
22. Jackson, Henry (1911). "Socrates"   ( https://en.wikisource.org/
wiki/1911_Encyclop%C3%A6dia_Britannica/Socrates ) . In
Chisholm, Hugh  (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 25
(11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 331.
23. Brian Todd Carey, Joshua Allfree, John Cairns (2006).
Warfare in the Ancient World  ( https://books.google.com/book
s?id=3OSfBwAAQBAJ&pg=PT32 ) Archived  ( https://web.archi
ve.org/web/20221229073713/https://books.google.com/book
s?id=3OSfBwAAQBAJ&pg=PT32 )  29 December 2022 at the
Wayback Machine  Pen and Sword, ISBN 1-84884-630-4
24. "The Diadochi and the Hellenistic Age"  ( http://exploretheme
d.com/Diadochi.asp?c=1 ) . Historical Atlas of the
Mediterranean . Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20151
223010309/http://explorethemed.com/Diadochi.asp?c=1 )
from the original on 23 December 2015 . Retrieved 23 August
2018 .
25. Parry, Ken (2009). Christianity: Religions of the World .
Infobase Publishing. p. 139. ISBN 9781438106397 .
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 51 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
26. Parry, Ken (2010). The Blackwell Companion to Eastern
Christianity . John Wiley & Sons. p. 368.
ISBN 9781444333619 .
27. Di Berardino, A.; D'Onofrio, G.; Studer, B. (2008). History of
Theology: The Middle Ages  ( https://books.google.com/book
s?id=2o5V2GWlaFIC ) . Liturgical Press. p. 26.
ISBN 978-0-8146-5916-8 . Retrieved 18 May  2015 .
28. Susan Wise Bauer, The History of the Medieval World: From
the Conversion of Constantine to the First Crusade  (2010)
29. * Kelly Boyd, ed. (1999). Encyclopedia of Historians and
Historical Writing vol 2  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=0
121vD9STIMC&pg=PA793 ) . Taylor & Francis. pp.  791– 94.
ISBN 978-1-884964-33-6 .
30. Fletcher, Banister, " Sir Banister Fletcher's A History of
Architecture ", Architectural Press; 20 edition (1996),
ISBN   978-0-7506-2267-7 , p. 172
31. "The History of the Bubonic Plague"  ( https://web.archive.org/
web/20061218044248/http://dpalm.med.uth.tmc.edu/courses/
BT2003/BTstudents2003_ﬁles/Plague2003.htm ) . Archived
from the original  ( http://dpalm.med.uth.tmc.edu/courses/BT20
03/BTstudents2003_ﬁles/Plague2003.htm )  on 18 December
2006.
32. "Scientists Identify Genes Critical to Transmission of Bubonic
Plague"  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20071007012619/http://
www3.niaid.nih.gov/news/newsreleases/1996/plague.htm ) .
.niaid.nih.gov. Archived from the original  ( http://www3.niaid.ni
h.gov/news/newsreleases/1996/plague.htm )  on 7 October
2007 . Retrieved 31 January  2010 .
33. Ralph R. Frerichs. "An Empire's Epidemic"  ( http://www.ph.ucl
a.edu/EPI/bioter/anempiresepidemic.html ) . Ph.ucla.edu.
Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20081213013158/htt
p://www.ph.ucla.edu/EPI/bioter/anempiresepidemic.html )
from the original on 13 December 2008 . Retrieved
31 January  2010 .
34. "Justinian's Flea"  ( http://www.justiniansﬂea.com/events.htm ) .
Justiniansﬂea.com. Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20
100125010502/http://www.justiniansﬂea.com/events.htm )
from the original on 25 January 2010 . Retrieved 31 January
2010 .
35. "The Great Arab Conquests"  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20
090202191807/http://www.iht.com/articles/2008/01/04/arts/id
briefs5H.php ) . International Herald Tribune . 29 March 2009.
Archived from the original  ( http://www.iht.com/articles/2008/0
1/04/arts/idbriefs5H.php )  on 2 February 2009 . Retrieved
31 January  2010 .
36. Laiou & Morisson 2007 , pp. 130–131; Pounds 1979 , p. 124.
37. Events used to mark the period's beginning include the sack
of Rome by the Goths  (410), the deposition of the last
western Roman emperor  (476), the Battle of Tolbiac  (496)
and the Gothic War  (535–552). Particular events taken to
mark its end include the founding of the Holy Roman Empire
by Otto I the Great  (962), the Great Schism  (1054) and the
Norman conquest of England  (1066).
38. Hunter, Shireen; et al. (2004). Islam in Russia: The Politics of
Identity and Security . M.E. Sharpe. p. 3. " (..) It is difﬁcult to
establish exactly when Islam ﬁrst appeared in Russia
because the lands that Islam penetrated early in its
expansion were not part of the Russian Empire at the time,
but were later incorporated into it. Islam reached the
Caucasus region in the middle of the seventh century as part
of the Arab conquest  of the Iranian Sassanian Empire. "
39. Kennedy, Hugh (1995). "The Muslims in Europe". In
McKitterick, Rosamund, The New Cambridge Medieval
History: c. 500 – c. 700 , pp. 249–72. Cambridge University
Press. ISBN   0-521-36292-X .
40. Joseph F. O´Callaghan, Reconquest and crusade in Medieval
Spain  (2002)
41. George Holmes, ed. (1988). The Oxford Illustrated History of
Medieval Europe  ( https://archive.org/details/oxfordillustrate00
holm/page/371 ) . Oxford University Press. p.  371  ( https://archi
ve.org/details/oxfordillustrate00holm/page/371 ) .
ISBN 978-0-19-820073-4 .
42. Michael Frassetto, Early Medieval World, The: From the Fall
of Rome to the Time of Charlemagne  (2013)
43. Grzymala-Busse, Anna (2020). "Beyond War and Contracts:
The Medieval and Religious Roots of the European State"  ( ht
tps://doi.org/10.1146%2Fannurev-polisci-050718-032628 ) .
Annual Review of Political Science . 23 : 19– 36. doi : 10.1146/
annurev-polisci-050718-032628  ( https://doi.org/10.1146%2Fa
nnurev-polisci-050718-032628 ) .
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 52 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
44. Michael G. Lamoureux, "The inﬂuence of Vikings on
European culture".
45. Gerald Mako, "The Islamization of the Volga Bulghars: A
Question Reconsidered", Archivum Eurasiae Medii Aevi 18,
2011, 199–223.
46. Seymour Drescher  and Stanley L. Engerman, eds. A
Historical Guide to World Slavery  (1998) pp. 197–200
47. John H. Mundy, Europe in the high Middle Ages, 1150–1309
(1973) online  ( https://archive.org/details/europeinhighmidd00
mund )
48. " Golden Horde  ( https://www.britannica.com/eb/article-903724
2/Golden-Horde ) Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/2008
0529001039/http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9037242/G
olden-Horde )  29 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine ", in
Encyclopædia Britannica , 2007.
49. Fennell, John (13 October 2014) [1983]. The Crisis of
Medieval Russia 1200–1304  ( https://books.google.com/book
s/about/The_Crisis_of_Medieval_Russia_1200_1304.html?id
=h2OuBAAAQBAJ ) . Routledge. p. 84.
ISBN   978-1-317-87314-3 .
50. Favereau, Marie  (20 April 2021). The Horde: How the
Mongols Changed the World  ( https://books.google.com/book
s?id=jKMbEAAAQBAJ ) . Harvard University Press. p. 300.
ISBN   978-0-674-24421-4 .
51. Wallace K. Ferguson, Europe in transition, 1300–1520  (1962)
online  ( https://archive.org/details/europeintransiti00ferg ) .
52. Mark Kishlansky et al. Civilization in the West: Volume 1 to
1715  (5th ed. 2003) p. 316
53. Cantor, p. 480.
54. Robb, John; Harris, Oliver J. (2013). The Body in History:
Europe from the Palaeolithic to the Futur  ( https://books.googl
e.com/books?id=f_y3w4cQmq8C&pg=PA165 ) . Cambridge
University Press . p. 165. ISBN 9780521195287 . Archived  ( htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20230427165349/https://books.goo
gle.com/books?id=f_y3w4cQmq8C&pg=PA165 )  from the
original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 December  2020 .
55. Febvre, Lucien; Martin, Henri-Jean (1997). The Coming of
the Book: The Impact of Printing 1450–1800  ( https://books.go
ogle.com/books?id=9opxcMjv4TUC&q=1439&pg=PA1 ) .
Verso. pp.  29– 30. ISBN   1859841082 . Archived  ( https://web.a
rchive.org/web/20230427155348/https://books.google.com/b
ooks?id=9opxcMjv4TUC&q=1439&pg=PA1 )  from the original
on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 December  2020 .
56. Robert A. Nisbet (1980). History of the Idea of Progress  ( http
s://books.google.com/books?id=QDRWfZ9Ydw0C&pg=PA10
3 ) . Transaction Publishers. p. 103. ISBN   978-1-4128-2548-1 .
57. "kwabs.com"  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20160303215021/
http://www.kwabs.com/tordesillas_treaty.html ) . Archived from
the original  ( http://www.kwabs.com/tordesillas_treaty.html )  on
3 March 2016.
58. MacKnight, CC (1976). The Voyage to Marege: Macassan
Trepangers in Northern Australia . Melbourne University
Press .
59. Euan Cameron, The European Reformation  (1991)
60. Conquest in the Americas  ( https://web.archive.org/web/2009
1028035130/http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_76157505
7_13/Spain.html ) . Archived from the original  ( https://encart
a.msn.com/encyclopedia_761575057_13/spain.html )  on 28
October 2009.
61. Herbert S, Klein, The American Finances of the Spanish
Empire : Royal Income and Expenditures in Colonial Mexico,
Peru, and Bolivia, 1680–1809  (1998) p. 92 online  ( https://ww
w.researchgate.net/proﬁle/Herbert-Klein/publication/3191759
90_The_American_Finances_of_the_Spanish_Empire_168
0-1809/links/5997235445851564431d0934/The-American-Fi
nances-of-the-Spanish-Empire-1680-1809.pdf ) Archived  ( http
s://web.archive.org/web/20210614034106/https://www.resear
chgate.net/proﬁle/Herbert-Klein/publication/319175990_The_
American_Finances_of_the_Spanish_Empire_1680-1809/link
s/5997235445851564431d0934/The-American-Finances-of-t
he-Spanish-Empire-1680-1809.pdf )  14 June 2021 at the
Wayback Machine
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 53 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
62. McLellan, James May (2010). Colonialism and Science: Saint
Domingue and the Old Regime  ( https://books.google.com/bo
oks?id=tIxDYmc0c3YC )  (reprint ed.). University of Chicago
Press. p. 63. ISBN   978-0-226-51467-3 . Archived  ( https://we
b.archive.org/web/20230427155348/https://books.google.co
m/books?id=tIxDYmc0c3YC )  from the original on 27 April
2023 . Retrieved 22 November  2010 . " [...] French Saint
Domingue at its height in the 1780s had become the single
richest and most productive colony in the world. "
63. Alcenat, Westenly. "The Case for Haitian Reparations"  ( http
s://jacobinmag.com/2017/01/haiti-reparations-france-slavery-
colonialism-debt/ ) . Jacobin . Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/
web/20210226224437/https://jacobinmag.com/2017/01/haiti-r
eparations-france-slavery-colonialism-debt/ )  from the original
on 26 February 2021 . Retrieved 20 February  2021 .
64. Geoffrey Parker and Lesley M. Smith, ed. (1997). The
General Crisis of the Seventeenth Century  ( https://books.goo
gle.com/books?id=-cJyz5jhkbkC ) . Psychology Press.
ISBN 978-0-203-99260-9 .
65. Trevor Aston, ed. Crisis in Europe 1560–1660: Essays from
Past and Present  (1965)
66. De Vries, Jan (2009). "The Economic Crisis of the
Seventeenth Century after Fifty Years". The Journal of
Interdisciplinary History . 40  (2): 151– 194. doi : 10.1162/
jinh.2009.40.2.151  ( https://doi.org/10.1162%2Fjinh.2009.4
0.2.151 ) . JSTOR   40263652  ( https://www.jstor.org/stable/4026
3652 ) . S2CID 195826470  ( https://api.semanticscholar.org/Co
rpusID:195826470 ) .
67. Burke, Peter (2009). "The Crisis in the Arts of the
Seventeenth Century: A Crisis of Representation?". The
Journal of Interdisciplinary History . 40  (2): 239– 261.
doi : 10.1162/jinh.2009.40.2.239  ( https://doi.org/10.1162%2Fjin
h.2009.40.2.239 ) . JSTOR 40263655  ( https://www.jstor.org/st
able/40263655 ) . S2CID   143713154  ( https://api.semanticscho
lar.org/CorpusID:143713154 ) .
68. Peter H. Wilson, The Thirty Years' War: Europe's Tragedy
(2011)
69. John B. Wolf, Louis XIV  (1968)
70. Lindsey Hughes, Russia in the Age of Peter the Great  (1998).
71. G.P. Gooch, Frederick the Great: The Ruler, the Writer, the
Man  (1947)
72. Max Beloff, The age of absolutism, 1660–1815  (1966).
73. Peter H. Wilson, Europe's Tragedy: A History of the Thirty
Years War  (2009)
74. Kamen, Henry (1968). "The Economic and Social
Consequences of the Thirty Years' War". Past & Present  (39):
44– 61. doi : 10.1093/past/39.1.44  ( https://doi.org/10.1093%2F
past%2F39.1.44 ) . JSTOR 649855  ( https://www.jstor.org/stabl
e/649855 ) .
75. Russell Weigley, The Age of Battles: The Quest for Decisive
Warfare from Breitenfeld to Waterloo  (1991).
76. G.M. Trevelyan, A shortened history of England  (1942) p.
363.
77. Paul M. Kennedy, ed. (1991). Grand Strategies in War and
Peace  ( https://archive.org/details/grandstrategiesi00paul ) .
Yale UP. p.  106  ( https://archive.org/details/grandstrategiesi00
paul/page/106 ) . ISBN   978-0-300-05666-2 .
78. Dennis E. Showalter, The Wars of Frederick the Great  (1996)
79. Nicholas Riasanovsky, A History of Russia  (4th ed. 1984), pp.
192–194, 284
80. Margaret C.C. Jacob, The Enlightenment: A Brief History with
Documents  (2000)
81. Alan Charles Kors, Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment
(Oxford UP, 2003)
82. Geoffrey Bruun, The enlightened despots  (1967).
83. Sootin, Harry. "Isaac Newton." New York, Messner (1955).
84. Robert R. Palmer, The Age of the Democratic Revolution
(1964)
85. Norman Davies (1996). Europe: A History  ( https://archive.or
g/details/europehistory00davi_0 ) . Oxford UP. pp.  633  ( https://
archive.org/details/europehistory00davi_0/page/633 ) –34.
ISBN 978-0-19-820171-7 .
86. Richard Weisberger et al., eds., Freemasonry on both sides
of the Atlantic: essays concerning the craft in the British Isles,
Europe, the United States, and Mexico  (East European
Monographs, 2002)
87. Margaret C. Jacob, Living the Enlightenment: Freemasonry
and politics in eighteenth-century Europe  (Oxford UP, 1991).
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 54 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
88. Art DeHoyos and S. Brent Morris (2004). Freemasonry in
Context: History, Ritual, Controversy  ( https://books.google.co
m/books?id=hXq4lJeX_DUC&pg=PA101 ) . Lexington Books.
pp.  100– 01. ISBN   978-0-7391-0781-2 . Archived  ( https://we
b.archive.org/web/20230427155355/https://books.google.co
m/books?id=hXq4lJeX_DUC&pg=PA101 )  from the original on
27 April 2023 . Retrieved 31 May  2018 .
89. Business and Economics. Leading Issues in Economic
Development , Oxford University Press US.
ISBN   0-19-511589-9 Google Books  ( https://books.google.co
m/books?id=CX9kBaVx4JkC&pg=PA98 ) Archived  ( https://we
b.archive.org/web/20230331130624/https://books.google.co
m/books?id=CX9kBaVx4JkC&pg=PA98 )  31 March 2023 at
the Wayback Machine
90. Robert C. Allen, "Why the industrial revolution was British:
commerce, induced invention, and the scientiﬁc revolution"
Economic History Review  64.2 (2011): 357–384 online  ( http://
www.unsa.edu.ar/histocat/haeconomica07/lecturas/2011alle
n.pdf ) Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/2021080500055
7/http://www.unsa.edu.ar/histocat/haeconomica07/lecturas/20
11allen.pdf )  5 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine .
91. The Birth of a New Europe State and Society in the
Nineteenth Century By Theodore S. Hamerow, 1983,
P.142-146  ( https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/The_Birth
_of_a_New_Europe/2kYhDgAAQBAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=Th
e+rising+standard+of+living+of+the+lower+classes+of+Europ
e&pg=PA146&printsec=frontcovr )
92. R.R. Palmer and Joel Colton, A History of the Modern World
(5th ed. 1978), p. 341
93. Steven Englund, Napoleon: A Political Life  (2004) p. 388
94. Gordon S. Wood, The radicalism of the American Revolution
(2011).
95. R.R. Palmer, The Age of the Democratic Revolution: A
Political History of Europe and America, 1760–1800: The
Challenge  (1959) pp. 4–5
96. A. Aulard in Arthur Tilley, ed. (1922). Modern France. A
Companion to French Studies  ( https://archive.org/details/mod
ernfrancecomp00tilluoft ) . Cambridge UP. p.  115  ( https://archiv
e.org/details/modernfrancecomp00tilluoft/page/115 ) .
97. Andrew Roberts, "Why Napoleon merits the title 'the Great,'"
BBC History Magazine  (1 November 2014)
98. Roberts, "Why Napoleon merits the title 'the Great," BBC
History Magazine  (1 November 2014)
99. Robert R. Palmer and Joel Colton, A History of the Modern
World  (New York: McGraw Hill, 1995), pp. 428–29.
100. William Doyle, The Oxford History of the French Revolution
(1989) pp. 341–68
101. Steven T. Ross, European Diplomatic History, 1789–1815:
France Against Europe  (1969)
102. Alexander Grab, Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe
(2003) pp. 62–65, 78–79, 88–96, 115–17, 154–59
103. Frederick B. Artz, Reaction and Revolution: 1814–1832
(1934) pp. 142–43
104. William Martin, Histoire de la Suisse  (Paris, 1926), pp. 187–
88, quoted in Crane Brinson, A Decade of Revolution: 1789–
1799  (1934) p. 235
105. James Harvey Robinson  and Charles A. Beard , ‘'The
Development of Modern Europe Volume II The Merging of
European into World History'’ (1930) v. 2 pp 88–89. online  ( ht
tps://archive.org/details/developmentofmod007381mbp )
106. Kenneth Scott Latourette, Christianity in a Revolutionary Age,
Volume I: The Nineteenth Century in Europe: Background
and the Roman Catholic Phase  (1958) pp. 321–23, 370,
458–59, 464–66.
107. John Horne (2012). A Companion to World War I  ( https://boo
ks.google.com/books?id=EjZHLXRKjtEC&pg=PA21 ) . John
Wiley & Sons. pp.  21– 22. ISBN   978-1-119-96870-2 . Archived
( https://web.archive.org/web/20230427155357/https://book
s.google.com/books?id=EjZHLXRKjtEC&pg=PA21 )  from the
original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 23 November  2016 .
108. Aaron Gillette, "Why Did They Fight the Great War? A Multi-
Level Class Analysis of the Causes of the First World War."
The History Teacher  40.1 (2006): 45–58.
109. Andrew Porter and William Roger Louis, eds. The Oxford
History of the British Empire: Volume 3, The Nineteenth
Century  (1999).
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 55 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
110. Kohn, Hans (1950). "Napoleon and the Age of Nationalism".
The Journal of Modern History . 22  (1): 21– 37.
doi : 10.1086/237315  ( https://doi.org/10.1086%2F237315 ) .
JSTOR   1875877  ( https://www.jstor.org/stable/1875877 ) .
S2CID 3270766  ( https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:32
70766 ) .
111. Alan Forrest and Peter H. Wilson, eds. The Bee and the
Eagle: Napoleonic France and the End of the Holy Roman
Empire  (Palgrave Macmillan, 2009).
112. Hagen Schulze, The Course of German Nationalism: From
Frederick the Great to Bismarck 1763–1867  (Cambridge UP,
1991).
113. Silvana Patriarca and Lucy Riall, eds., The Risorgimento
Revisited: Nationalism and Culture in Nineteenth-century Italy
(Palgrave Macmillan, 2011).
114. Levine, Louis (1914). "Pan-Slavism and European Politics".
Political Science Quarterly . 29  (4): 664– 686.
doi : 10.2307/2142012  ( https://doi.org/10.2307%2F2142012 ) .
JSTOR 2142012  ( https://www.jstor.org/stable/2142012 ) .
115. Charles Jelavich, Tsarist Russia and Balkan nationalism:
Russian inﬂuence in the internal affairs of Bulgaria and
Serbia, 1879–1886  (1958).
116. Christopher Clark, The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to
War in 1914  (2012)
117. Alister E. McGrath (2012). Christian History: An Introduction
( https://books.google.com/books?id=gIFfXCyAYmoC&pg=PT
270 ) . John Wiley & Sons. p. 270. ISBN 978-1-118-33783-7 .
Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20230427155355/http
s://books.google.com/books?id=gIFfXCyAYmoC&pg=PT270 )
from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 23 November
2016 .
118. Richard Blanke, Prussian Poland in the German Empire
(1871–1900)  (1981)
119. Norman Davies, God's Playground: A History of Poland, Vol.
2: 1795 to the Present  (2005).
120. Sales Vives, Pere (22 September 2020). L'Espanyolització de
Mallorca: 1808–1932  (in Catalan). El Gall editor. p. 422.
ISBN   9788416416707 .
121. Antoni Simon, Els orígens històrics de l'anticatalanisme  ( htt
p://roderic.uv.es/handle/10550/34591 ) Archived  ( https://web.a
rchive.org/web/20220605094401/https://roderic.uv.es/handl
e/10550/34591 )  5 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine ,
páginas 45–46, L'Espill, nº 24, Universitat de València
122. Mayans Balcells, Pere (2019). Cròniques Negres del Català
A L'Escola  (in Catalan) (del 1979 ed.). Edicions del 1979.
p. 230. ISBN   978-84-947201-4-7 .
123. Lluís, García Sevilla (2021). Recopilació d'accions genocides
contra la nació catalana  (in Catalan). Base. p. 300.
ISBN 9788418434983 .
124. Bea Seguí, Ignaci (2013). En cristiano! Policia i Guàrdia Civil
contra la llengua catalana  (in Catalan). Cossetània. p. 216.
ISBN   9788490341339 .
125. Sobrequés Callicó, Jaume (29 January 2021). Repressió
borbònica i resistència identitària a la Catalunya del segle
XVIII  (in Catalan). Departament de Justícia de la Generalitat
de Catalunya. p. 410. ISBN   978-84-18601-20-0 .
126. Ferrer Gironès, Francesc (1985). La persecució política de la
llengua catalana  (in Catalan) (62 ed.). Edicions 62. p. 320.
ISBN 978-8429723632 .
127. Benet, Josep (1995). L'intent franquista de genocidi cultural
contra Catalunya  (in Catalan). Publicacions de l'Abadia de
Montserrat. ISBN   84-7826-620-8 .
128. Llaudó Avila, Eduard (2021). Racisme i supremacisme
polítics a l'Espanya contemporània  (7th ed.). Manresa: Parcir.
ISBN 9788418849107 .
129. "Novetats legislatives en matèria lingüística aprovades el
2018 que afecten els territoris de parla catalana"  ( https://ww
w.plataforma-llengua.cat/media/upload/pdf/novetats_legislativ
es_en_materia_linguistic02_1571310685.pdf ) (PDF) .
Plataforma per la llengua. Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/w
eb/20211020181407/https://www.plataforma-llengua.cat/medi
a/upload/pdf/novetats_legislatives_en_materia_linguistic02_1
571310685.pdf ) (PDF)  from the original on 20 October 2021 .
Retrieved 8 October  2022 .
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 56 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
130. "Novetats legislatives en matèria lingüística aprovades el
2019 que afecten els territoris de parla catalana"  ( https://plata
forma-llengua.cat/media/upload/arxius/ambits-treball/Dret
s%20Ling%C3%BC%C3%ADstics/Novetats_legislatives_en_
mat%C3%A8ria_ling%C3%BC%C3%ADstic-2019-ok.pdf )
(PDF) . Plataforma per la llengua. Archived  ( https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20220327162711/https://plataforma-llengua.cat/me
dia/upload/arxius/ambits-treball/Drets%20Ling%C3%BC%C
3%ADstics/Novetats_legislatives_en_mat%C3%A8ria_lin
g%C3%BC%C3%ADstic-2019-ok.pdf ) (PDF)  from the
original on 27 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 October  2022 .
131. "Comportament lingüístic davant dels cossos policials
espanyols"  ( https://www.plataforma-llengua.cat/media/uploa
d/pdf/linguisticcossospolicials_1576579756.pdf ) (PDF) .
Plataforma per la llengua. 2019. Archived  ( https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20211020181419/https://www.plataforma-llengua.c
at/media/upload/pdf/linguisticcossospolicials_1576579756.pd
f ) (PDF)  from the original on 20 October 2021 . Retrieved
8 October  2022 .
132. Moreno Cabrera, Juan Carlos. "L'espanyolisme lingüístic i la
llengua comuna"  ( https://www.cicac.cat/wp-content/uploads/2
018/01/Espanyolisme_ling%C3%BC%C3%ADstic_Juan-Carl
os-Moreno.pdf ) (PDF) . VIII Jornada sobre l'Ús del Català a la
Justícia  (in Catalan). Ponència del Consell de l'advocacia de
Catalunya. Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/202211050
81404/https://www.cicac.cat/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Esp
anyolisme_ling%C3%BC%C3%ADstic_Juan-Carlos-Moren
o.pdf ) (PDF)  from the original on 5 November 2022 .
Retrieved 8 October  2022 .
133. Ellwood Patterson Cubberley (1920). The History of
Education: Educational Practice and Progress Considered as
a Phase of the Development and Spread of Western
Civilization  ( https://archive.org/details/historyeducatio02cubb
goog ) . Houghton Mifﬂin. pp.  711  ( https://archive.org/details/hi
storyeducatio02cubbgoog/page/n742 ) –23.
134. James Bowen, A history of western education: The modern
west  (1981) online  ( https://archive.org/details/historyofwester
n0000bowe_h0l6/page/n5/mode/2up )
135. Henry Kissinger, A world restored: Metternich, Castlereagh,
and the problems of peace, 1812–22  (1957)
136. Peter Viereck (1978). Conservative Thinkers: From John
Adams to Winston Churchill  ( https://books.google.com/book
s?id=qXxHHXwJT28C&pg=PA71 ) . Transaction Publishers.
pp.  71– 77. ISBN   978-1-4128-2026-4 . Archived  ( https://web.ar
chive.org/web/20230427155348/https://books.google.com/bo
oks?id=qXxHHXwJT28C&pg=PA71 )  from the original on 27
April 2023 . Retrieved 28 September  2018 .
137. Jonathan Sperber (2005). The European Revolutions, 1848
—1851  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=hRuHT71EZDw
C&pg=PA86 ) . Cambridge University Press. pp.  86– 88.
ISBN 978-0-521-83907-5 . Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/
web/20230427155427/https://books.google.com/books?id=h
RuHT71EZDwC&pg=PA86 )  from the original on 27 April
2023 . Retrieved 28 September  2018 .
138. Pamela Pilbeam (1990). The Middle Classes in Europe,
1789–1914: France, Germany, Italy, and Russia  ( https://book
s.google.com/books?id=ZkZdDwAAQBAJ&pg=PA240 ) .
Macmillan Education UK. p. 240. ISBN   978-1-349-20606-3 .
139. Napoleon II  (1811–1832) was the son of Napoleon I but he
never actually ruled.
140. Napoleon III." in Anne Commire, ed. Historic World Leaders ,
(Gale, 1994) online  ( https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/K1616000
030/GPS?u=wikipedia&sid=GPS&xid=828abdad ) Archived  ( h
ttps://web.archive.org/web/20221229073725/https://go.gale.c
om/ps/i.do?p=GPS&u=wikipedia&id=GALE%7B%7B%21%7
D%7DK1616000030&v=2.1&it=r&sid=GPS&asid=828abdad )
29 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine .
141. J.P.T. Bury, Napoleon III and the Second Empire  (1968).
142. Denis Brogan, The French Nation: From Napoleon to Pétain,
1814–1940  (1957).
143. Katherine Ann Lerman, "Bismarck, Otto von." in Europe
1789–1914: Encyclopedia of the Age of Industry and Empire ,
edited by John Merriman and Jay Winter, (Charles Scribner's
Sons, 2006) vol 1, pp. 233–242. online  ( https://link.gale.com/
apps/doc/CX3446900089/GPS?u=wikipedia&sid=GPS&xid=f
59ca5de ) Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/2022122907
3716/https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=GPS&u=wikipedia&id=G
ALE%7B%7B%21%7D%7DCX3446900089&v=2.1&it=r&sid=
GPS&asid=f59ca5de )  29 December 2022 at the Wayback
Machine .
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 57 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
144. Theodore S. Hamerow, ed., Otto von Bismarck and imperial
Germany: a historical assessment  (1994)
145. A. Wess Mitchell (2018). The Grand Strategy of the
Habsburg Empire  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=qxtED
wAAQBAJ&pg=PA307 ) . Princeton University Press. p. 307.
ISBN   978-1-4008-8996-9 . Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/
web/20230427155347/https://books.google.com/books?id=qx
tEDwAAQBAJ&pg=PA307 )  from the original on 27 April 2023 .
Retrieved 22 July  2018 .
146. Massie, Robert K. (2011). Catherine the Great: Portrait of a
Woman . Random House. ISBN 978-1-5883-6044-1 .
147. Dominic Lieven, Empire: The Russian Empire and Its Rivals
(2000) pp. 226–30, 278–80.
148. Cánovas, Marília D. Klaumann (2004). "A grande emigração
européia para o Brasil e o imigrante espanhol no cenário da
cafeicultura paulista: aspectos de uma (in)visibilidade"  ( http
s://periodicos.ufpb.br/ojs2/index.php/srh/article/view/11303/6
417 )  [The great European immigration to Brazil and
immigrants within the Spanish scenario of the Paulista coffee
plantations: one of the issues (in) visibility]. Sæculum  (in
Portuguese). 11 : 115– 136.
149. A. J. P. Taylor , English History 1914–1945 , and The Struggle
for Mastery in Europe, 1848–1918
150. The ﬁrst Ford Model T , a car for the masses, rolled off the
assembly line  in 1908.
151. Brian Bond, "The First World War" in C.L. Mowat , ed. The
New Cambridge Modern History: Vol. XII: The Shifting
Balance of World Forces 1898–1945  (2nd ed. 1968) online  ( h
ttps://archive.org/stream/iB_CMH/12#page/n3/mode/1up )  pp.
171–208.
152. Christopher Clark , The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to
War in 1914  (2013) p xxiii
153. Overviews include David Stevenson, Cataclysm: The First
World War as Political Tragedy  (2005) and Ian F. W. Beckett,
The Great War: 1914–1918  (2nd ed. 2007)
154. For reference see Martin Gilbert, Atlas of World War I  (1995)
and Spencer Tucker, ed., The European Powers in the First
World War: An Encyclopedia  (1996)
155. Sally Marks, The Illusion of Peace: International Relations in
Europe 1918–1933  (2nd ed. 2003)
156. Zara Steiner, The Lights that Failed: European International
History 1919–1933  (2007)
157. Carole Fink, "The Paris Peace Conference and the Question
of Minority Rights," Peace and Change: A journal of peace
research  (1996) 21#3 pp. 273–88
158. Raymond James Sontag, . A broken world, 1919–1939
(1972) online free to borrow  ( https://archive.org/details/broke
nworld1919100sont ) ; wide-ranging survey of European
history.
159. Nicholas Atkin; Michael Biddiss (2008). Themes in Modern
European History, 1890–1945  ( https://books.google.com/boo
ks?id=DFN_AgAAQBAJ&pg=PA244 ) . Routledge. pp.  243–
44. ISBN 978-1-134-22257-5 .
160. Gregory M. Luebbert, Liberalism, fascism, or social
democracy: Social classes and the political origins of regimes
in interwar Europe  (Oxford UP, 1991).
161. Martin Blinkhorn, The Fascist Challenge  in Gordon Martel,
ed. A Companion to Europe: 1900–1945  (2011) p. 313
162. Charles Kindleberger, The World in Depression, 1929–1939
(2nd ed. 1986) provides a broad survey by an economist,
163. Piers Brendon, The Dark Valley: A Panorama of the 1930s
(2000) 816pp covers far more details by a political historian.
164. F.P. Walters, A History of the League of Nations  (Oxford UP,
1965). online free  ( https://libraryresources.unog.ch/ld.php?co
ntent_id=31457235 ) Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20
200521233942/https://libraryresources.unog.ch/ld.php?conte
nt_id=31457235 )  21 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine .
165. David Clay Large, Between Two Fires: Europe's Path in the
1930s  (1991)
166. Stanley G. Payne, The Spanish Revolution  (1970) pp. 262–
76
167. I.C.B. Dear and M.R.D. Foot, eds., The Oxford Companion to
World War II  (1995) covers every country and major
campaign.
168. Norman Davies, No Simple Victory: World War II in Europe,
1939–1945  (2008)
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 58 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
169. "Second Second Source List and Detailed Death Tolls for the
Twentieth Century Hemoclysm "  ( http://necrometrics.com/20c
5m.htm ) . Users.erols.com. Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/
web/20110307141223/http://necrometrics.com/20c5m.htm )
from the original on 7 March 2011 . Retrieved 2 May  2012 .
170. Dinah Shelton , ed., Encyclopedia of Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity  (3 vol. 2004)
171. John Wheeler-Bennett, The Semblance of Peace: The
Political Settlement After The Second World War  (1972)
thorough diplomatic coverage 1939–1952.
172. Michael J. Hogan, The Marshall Plan: America, Britain and
the Reconstruction of Western Europe, 1947–1952  (1989)
pp. 26–28, 430–43.
173. DeLong, J. Bradford; Eichengreen, Barry (1993). "The
Marshall Plan: History's Most Successful Structural
Adjustment Program"  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=k
GCfmmlGtPEC&pg=PA189 ) . In Dornbusch, Rudiger; Nolling,
Wilhelm; Layard, Richard (eds.). Postwar Economic
Reconstruction and Lessons for the East Today . MIT Press.
pp.  189– 230. ISBN   978-0-262-04136-2 . Archived  ( https://we
b.archive.org/web/20230415065100/https://books.google.co
m/books?id=kGCfmmlGtPEC&pg=PA189 )  from the original
on 15 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 March  2018 .
174. Mark Kramer, "The Soviet Bloc and the Cold War in Europe,"
Klaus Larresm, ed. (2014). A Companion to Europe Since
1945  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=EyNcCwAAQBAJ&
pg=PT174 ) . Wiley. p. 79. ISBN 978-1-118-89024-0 .
175. Walter Laqueur, "The Slow Death of Europe", The National
Interest 16 August 2011 online  ( http://nationalinterest.org/co
mmentary/why-the-euro-the-least-europes-worries-5767 )
Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20110926084231/htt
p://nationalinterest.org/commentary/why-the-euro-the-least-e
uropes-worries-5767 )  26 September 2011 at the Wayback
Machine
176. Hay, W.A.; Sicherman, H. (2007). Is There Still a West?: The
Future of the Atlantic Alliance  ( https://books.google.com/book
s?id=VwDQ3jAGMX0C ) . University of Missouri Press, Queen
Elizabeth also had a major breakdown causing her to die
cause of the stress overload. p. 107.
ISBN   978-0-8262-6549-4 . Retrieved 18 May  2015 .
177. David Priestland, "Margaret Thatcher?" BBC History
Magazine  1 May 2013
178. "A Europe without frontiers"  ( http://europa.eu/abc/history/199
0-1999/index_en.htm ) . Europa (web portal) . Archived  ( https://
web.archive.org/web/20110317105311/http://europa.eu/abc/h
istory/1990-1999/index_en.htm )  from the original on 17
March 2011 . Retrieved 25 June  2007 .
179. Spiegel Online, Hamburg (26 November 2009). "NATO's
Eastward Expansion: Calming Russian Fears"  ( http://www.spi
egel.de/international/world/nato-s-eastward-expansion-did-th
e-west-break-its-promise-to-moscow-a-663315-2.html ) . Der
Spiegel . Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20150609045
426/http://www.spiegel.de/international/world/nato-s-eastwar
d-expansion-did-the-west-break-its-promise-to-moscow-a-66
3315-2.html )  from the original on 9 June 2015 . Retrieved
17 June  2015 .
180. Bojan Pancevski, "Merkel Says Auf Wiedersehen to a
Diminished Europe: The long-serving German chancellor
helped the EU survive a string of crises, but her caution and
focus on her own country’s interests have undermined the
continent’s once-grand aspirations" Wall Street Journal  Sept
24. 2021  ( https://www.wsj.com/articles/merkel-says-auf-wied
ersehen-to-a-diminished-europe-11632495640 ) Archived  ( htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20210927103547/https://www.wsj.c
om/articles/merkel-says-auf-wiedersehen-to-a-diminished-eur
ope-11632495640 )  27 September 2021 at the Wayback
Machine
181. Herb, Jeremy; Starr, Barbara ; Kaufman, Ellie (24 February
2022). "US orders 7,000 more troops to Europe following
Russia's invasion of Ukraine"  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20
220227052443/https://edition.cnn.com/2022/02/24/politics/us-
military-ukraine-russia/index.html ) . Oren Liebermann and
Michael Conte. CNN. Archived from the original  ( https://ww
w.cnn.com/2022/02/24/politics/us-military-ukraine-russia/inde
x.html )  on 27 February 2022 . Retrieved 27 February  2022 .
" Russia's invasion of its neighbor in Ukraine is the largest
conventional military attack that's been seen since World War
II, the senior defense ofﬁcial said Thursday outlining United
States observations of the unfolding conﬂict "
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 59 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
182. Karmanau, Yuras; Heintz, Jim; Isachenkov, Vladimir;
Litvinova, Dasha (24 February 2022). "Russia presses
invasion to outskirts of Ukrainian capital"  ( https://abcnews.g
o.com/International/wireStory/russia-attacks-ukraine-deﬁant-p
utin-warns-us-nato-83078619 ) . Photograph by Evgeniy
Maloletka  (AP Photo). United States: ABC News. Associated
Press . Archived  ( https://ghostarchive.org/archive/20220227/h
ttps://abcnews.go.com/International/wireStory/russia-attacks-
ukraine-deﬁant-putin-warns-us-nato-83078619 )  from the
original on 27 February 2022 . Retrieved 26 February  2022 .
" ... [a]mounts to the largest ground war in Europe since World
War II. "
183. Tsvetkova, Maria; Vasovic, Aleksandar; Zinets, Natalia;
Charlish, Alan; Grulovic, Fedja (27 February 2022). "Putin
puts nuclear 'deterrence' forces on alert"  ( https://www.reuter
s.com/world/europe/western-allies-expel-key-russian-banks-g
lobal-system-ukraine-ﬁghts-2022-02-27/ ) . Reuters . Writing by
Robert Birsel and Frank Jack Daniel; Editing by William
Mallard, Angus MacSwan and David Clarke. Kyiv . Archived  ( h
ttps://ghostarchive.org/archive/20220227/https://www.reuter
s.com/world/europe/western-allies-expel-key-russian-banks-g
lobal-system-ukraine-ﬁghts-2022-02-27/ )  from the original on
27 February 2022 . Retrieved 27 February  2022 . " ... [t]he
biggest assault on a European state since World War Two. "
184. Survival of Information: the earliest prehistoric town in Europe
( https://wayback.archive-it.org/all/20120702232530/http://ww
w.historyoﬁnformation.com/expanded.php?category=Survival
+of+Information )
185. Magazine, Smithsonian; Curry, Andrew. "Mystery of the
Varna Gold: What Caused These Ancient Societies to
Disappear?"  ( https://www.smithsonianmag.com/travel/varna-
bulgaria-gold-graves-social-hierarchy-prehistoric-archaelogy-
smithsonian-journeys-travel-quarterly-180958733/ ) .
Smithsonian Magazine .
186. "Bulgaria Showcases World's Oldest Gold, Varna Chalcolithic
Necropolis Treasure, in European Parliament in Brussels"  ( htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20230324070432/http://archaeolog
yinbulgaria.com/2015/10/15/bulgaria-showcases-worlds-olde
st-gold-varna-chalcolithic-necropolis-treasure-in-european-pa
rliament-in-brussels/ ) . 15 October 2015. Archived from the
original  ( http://archaeologyinbulgaria.com/2015/10/15/bulgari
a-showcases-worlds-oldest-gold-varna-chalcolithic-necropoli
s-treasure-in-european-parliament-in-brussels/ )  on 24 March
2023 . Retrieved 14 May  2023 .
187. Magazine, Smithsonian; Daley, Jason. "World's Oldest Gold
Object May Have Just Been Unearthed in Bulgaria"  ( https://w
ww.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/oldest-gold-object-une
arthed-bulgaria-180960093/ ) . Smithsonian Magazine .
188. "Heritage :: World's oldest gold :: Europost"  ( https://web.archi
ve.org/web/20190928002450/https://europost.eu/en/a/view/w
orld-s-oldest-gold-24581 ) . Archived from the original  ( https://e
uropost.eu/en/a/view/world-s-oldest-gold-24581 )  on 28
September 2019 . Retrieved 14 May  2023 .
189. Kruk, Janusz; Milisauskas, Sarunas (2002). Milisauskas,
Sarunas (ed.). European Prehistory: A Survey  ( https://book
s.google.com/books?id=roMxst3NKtwC ) . Springer. p. 236.
ISBN 978-0-306-46793-6 .
190. Owens, Gareth A. (1999). "Balkan Neolithic Scripts".
Kadmos . 38  ( 1– 2): 114– 120. doi : 10.1515/
kadm.1999.38.1-2.114  ( https://doi.org/10.1515%2Fkadm.199
9.38.1-2.114 ) . S2CID 162088927  ( https://api.semanticschola
r.org/CorpusID:162088927 ) .
191. Lazarovici, Gheorghe and Merlini, Marco, "4 Tărtăria Tablets:
The Latest Evidence in an Archaeological Thriller", Western-
Pontic Culture Ambience and Pattern: In memory of Eugen
Comsa, edited by Lolita Nikolova, Marco Merlini and
Alexandra Comsa, Warsaw, Poland: De Gruyter Open
Poland, pp. 53-142, 2016
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 60 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
192. Rehm, Ellen (2010). "The Impact of the Achaemenids on
Thrace: A Historical Review". In Nieling, Jens; Rehm, Ellen
(eds.). Achaemenid Impact in the Black Sea: Communication
of Powers . Black Sea Studies. Vol. 11. Aarhus University
Press. p. 143. ISBN 978-8779344310 . " In 470/469 BC, the
strategist Kimon, mentioned above, defeated the Persian
ﬂeet at the mouth of the Eurymedon river. Subsequently, it
seems that the royal house of the Odrysians in Thrace
gained power and in about 465/464 BC emerged from the
Persian shadow. The Odrysians became aware of the power
vacuum resulting from the withdrawal of the Persians and
claimed back supremacy over the region inhabited by several
tribes. From this period onwards an indigenous ruling dynasty
is comprehensible. "
▪ Laiou, Angeliki E. ; Morisson, Cécile (2007). The Byzantine Economy . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
ISBN   978-0-521-84978-4 .
▪ Pounds, Norman John Greville (1979). An Historical Geography of Europe, 1500–1840  ( https://archive.org/details/historicalgeogr
a0000poun ) . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN   978-0-521-22379-9 .
▪ EurhistXX: The Network for the Contemporary History of Europe  ( http://hsozkult.geschichte.hu-berlin.de/eurhistxx.asp ) , edited in
English from Berlin
▪ Contains information on historical trends in living standards in various European countries  ( http://bookshop.europa.eu/en/eurosta
t-yearbook-95-pbCA8193204/ )
▪ European History Primary Sources  ( http://primary-sources.eui.eu/ )  Online access to primary sources for historians
▪ New York Public Library . "History of Europe"  ( http://www.nypl.org/collections/nypl-recommendations/guides?ﬁeld_subject_taxono
my_value=604 ) . Research Guides . New York.
▪ Vistorica – Timelines of European modern history  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20131005005904/http://www.vistorica.com/eng/pe
rsongroups/1500%2C2000%2Ceuropean%2Call.html )
Sources
Further reading
External links
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 61 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=History_of_Europe&oldid=1338350629 "
History of Europe - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Europe
Стр. 62 из 62 27.02.2026, 16:07
