Renaissance
The Renaissance  ( UK : / r ɪ ˈ n e ɪ s ən s / rin- AY -sənss , US : / ˈ r ɛ n ə s ɑː n s /
⡑
REN -ə-sahnss )
[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ a ]
 is a European period of history  and
cultural movement , very roughly defined as covering the 14th through 17th centuries,
[ 4 ] [ 5 ]
 though sometimes more narrowly defined
for instance as only covering the 15th through 16th centuries.
[ 6 ]
 It marked the transition from the Middle Ages  to modernity  and was
characterized by the European rediscovery and revival of the literary, philosophical, and artistic achievements of classical antiquity .
[ 5 ]
 Associated with great social change  in most fields and disciplines, including art , architecture , politics, literature , exploration  and
science , the Renaissance was first centered in the Republic of Florence , then spread to the rest of Italy  and later throughout Europe.
The term rinascita  ('rebirth') first appeared in Lives of the Artists  ( c. 1550 ) by Giorgio Vasari , while the corresponding French word
renaissance  was adopted into English as the term for this period during the 1830s.
[ 7 ] [ b ]
The Renaissance's intellectual basis was founded in its version of humanism , derived from the concept of Roman humanitas  and the
rediscovery of classical Greek philosophy , such as that of Protagoras , who said that "man is the measure of all things". Although the
invention of metal movable type  sped the dissemination of ideas from the later 15th century, the changes of the Renaissance were not
uniform across Europe: the first traces appear in Italy as early as the late 13th century, in particular with the writings of Dante  and
the paintings of Giotto .
As  a  cultural  movement,  the  Renaissance  encompassed  innovative  flowering  of  literary  Latin  a n d a n e x p l o s i o n o f vernacular
literatures , beginning with the 14th-century resurgence of learning based on classical sources, which contemporaries credited to
Petrarch ; the development of linear perspective and other techniques of rendering a more natural reality in painting; and gradual but
widespread educational reform . It saw myriad artistic developments and contributions from such polymaths  as Leonardo da Vinci
and Michelangelo , who inspired the term "Renaissance man".
[ 8 ] [ 9 ]
 In politics, the Renaissance contributed to the development of the
customs and conventions of diplomacy, and in science to an increased reliance on observation and inductive reasoning . The period
also saw revolutions in other intellectual and social scientific  pursuits, as well as the introduction of modern banking  and the field of
accounting .
[ 10 ]
The Renaissance period  started during the crisis of the Late Middle Ages  and conventionally ends with the waning of humanism , and
Period
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 1 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
the advent of the Reformation  (1517), the Sack of Rome (1527)  or the Counter-Reformation  (1545), and in art, the Baroque  period. It
had a different period and characteristics in different regions, such as the Italian Renaissance, the Northern Renaissance , the
Spanish Renaissance , etc. Proponents of a "long Renaissance" may put its beginning in the 14th century and its end in the 17th
century.
[ c ]
The traditional view focuses more on the Renaissance's early modern  aspects and argues that it was a break from the past, but many
historians today focus more on its medieval aspects and argue that it was an extension of the Middle Ages.
[ 14 ] [ 15 ]
The beginnings of the period—the early Renaissance of the 15th century and the Italian Proto-Renaissance  from around 1250 or 1300
—overlap considerably with the Late Middle Ages , conventionally dated to c.   1350–1500 , and the Middle Ages themselves were a long
period filled with gradual changes, like the modern age; as a transitional period between both, the Renaissance has close similarities
to both, especially the late and early sub-periods of either.
The Renaissance began in Florence , one of the many states of Italy .
[ 16 ]
 The Italian Renaissance concluded in 1527 when Holy Roman
Emperor Charles V  launched an assault on Rome  during the war of the League of Cognac . Nevertheless, its impact endured in the art
of renowned Italian painters like Tintoretto , Sofonisba Anguissola , and Paolo Veronese , who continued their work during the mid-to-
late 16th century.
[ 17 ]
Various  theories  have  been  proposed  to  account  for  its  origins  and  characteristics,  focusing  on  a  variety  of  factors,  including
Florence's social and civic peculiarities at the time: its political structure, the patronage of its dominant family, the Medici ,
[ 18 ]
 and
the migration of Greek scholars  and their texts to Italy following the fall of Constantinople  to the Ottoman Empire .
[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ]
 Other
major centers were Venice , Genoa , Milan , Rome  during the Renaissance Papacy , and Naples . From Italy, the Renaissance spread
throughout Europe and also to American, African and Asian territories ruled by the European colonial powers of the time or where
Christian missionaries were active.
The Renaissance has a long and complex historiography , and in line with general skepticism of discrete periodizations, there has
been much debate among historians reacting to the 19th-century glorification of the "Renaissance" and individual cultural heroes as
"Renaissance men", questioning the usefulness of Renaissance  as a term and as a historical delineation.
[ 22 ]
Some observers have questioned whether the Renaissance was a cultural "advance" from the Middle Ages, instead seeing it as a
period of pessimism and nostalgia  for classical antiquity ,
[ 23 ]
 while social and economic historians, especially of the longue durée ,
have instead focused on the continuity  between the two eras,
[ 24 ]
 which are linked, as Panofsky  observed, "by a thousand ties".
[ 25 ] [ d ]
Italian Renaissance
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 2 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
The word has also been extended to other historical and cultural movements, such as the Carolingian Renaissance  (8th and 9th
centuries), Ottonian Renaissance  (10th and 11th century), and the Renaissance of the 12th century .
[ 27 ]
The Renaissance was a cultural movement that profoundly affected European intellectual life in the early modern period . Beginning
in Italy, and spreading to the rest of Europe by the 16th century, its influence was felt in art , architecture , philosophy , literature ,
music , science , technology , politics, religion, and other aspects of intellectual inquiry. Renaissance scholars employed the humanist
method in study, and searched for realism and human emotion in art.
[ 28 ]
Renaissance  humanists  such  as  Poggio  Bracciolini  sought  out  in  Europe's  monastic  libraries  the  Latin  literary,  historical,  and
oratorical texts of antiquity , while the fall of Constantinople  (1453) generated a wave of émigré Greek scholars  bringing precious
manuscripts in ancient Greek , many of which had fallen into obscurity in the West. It was in their new focus on literary and historical
texts that Renaissance scholars differed so markedly from the medieval scholars of the Renaissance of the 12th century , who had
focused on studying Greek  and Arabic  works of natural sciences, philosophy, and mathematics, rather than on such cultural texts.
In the revival of neoplatonism , Renaissance humanists did not reject Christianity ; on the contrary, many of the Renaissance's
greatest works were devoted to it, and the Church patronized many works of Renaissance art.
[ 29 ]
 But a subtle shift took place in the
way that intellectuals approached religion that was reflected in many other areas of cultural life.
[ 30 ]
 In  addition,  many  Greek
Christian works, including the Greek New Testament, were brought back from Byzantium  to Western Europe and engaged Western
scholars for the first time since late antiquity. This new engagement with Greek Christian works, and particularly the return to the
original Greek of the New Testament promoted by humanists Lorenzo Valla  and Erasmus , helped pave the way for the Reformation .
Well after the first artistic return to classicism  had been exemplified in the sculpture of Nicola Pisano , Florentine painters led by
Masaccio  strove to portray the human form realistically, developing techniques to render perspective  and light more naturally.
Political philosophers , most famously Niccolò Machiavelli , sought to describe political life as it really was, that is to understand it
rationally. A critical contribution to Italian Renaissance humanism, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola  wrote De hominis dignitate
( Oration on the Dignity of Man , 1486), a series of theses on philosophy, natural thought, faith, and magic defended against any
opponent on the grounds of reason. In addition to studying classical Latin and Greek, Renaissance authors also began increasingly to
use vernacular languages; combined with the introduction of the printing press , this allowed many more people access to books,
especially the Bible.
[ 31 ]
In all, the Renaissance can be viewed as an attempt by intellectuals to study and improve the secular and worldly, both through the
Overview
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 3 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Portrait of a Young Woman
( c.  1480 –85) ( Simonetta
Vespucci ) by Sandro Botticelli
View of Florence , birthplace of the
Renaissance
revival of ideas from antiquity and through novel approaches to thought. Political philosopher Hans
Kohn  describes it as an age where "Men looked for new foundations"; some like Erasmus  and Thomas
More  envisioned new reformed spiritual foundations, others, in the words of Machiavelli , una lunga
sperienza delle cose moderne ed una continua lezione delle antiche  (a long experience with modern
life and a continuous learning from antiquity).
[ 32 ]
Sociologist Rodney Stark  plays down the Renaissance in favor of the earlier innovations of the Italian
city-states  in the High Middle Ages , which married responsive government, Christianity and the birth
of capitalism .
[ 33 ]
 This analysis argues that, whereas the great European states (France and Spain)
were  absolute  monarchies ,  and  others  were  under  direct  Church  control,  the  independent  city-
republics  of Italy took over the principles of capitalism invented on monastic estates and set off a vast
unprecedented Commercial Revolution  that preceded and financed the Renaissance.
Historian Leon Poliakov  offers a critical view in his seminal study of European racist thought: The
Aryan Myth . According to Poliakov, the use of ethnic origin myths are first used by Renaissance
humanists "in the service of a new born chauvinism".
[ 34 ] [ 35 ]
Many argue that the ideas characterizing the Renaissance had their origin in Florence  at the
turn of the 13th and 14th centuries, in particular with the writings of Dante Alighieri  (1265–
1321) and Petrarch  (1304–1374), as well as the paintings of Giotto di Bondone  (1267–1337).
Some writers date the Renaissance quite precisely; one proposed starting point is 1401, when
the rival geniuses Lorenzo Ghiberti  and Filippo Brunelleschi  competed for the contract to
build the bronze doors for the Baptistery  of the Florence Cathedral  (Ghiberti won).
[ 36 ]
 Others
see more general competition between artists and polymaths such as Brunelleschi, Ghiberti,
Donatello , a n d Masaccio  for  artistic  commissions  as  sparking  the  creativity  of  the
Renaissance.
Yet it remains much debated why the Renaissance began in Italy, and why it began when it
did.  Accordingly,  several  theories  have  been  put  forward  to  explain  its  origins.  Peter
Rietbergen posits that various influential Proto-Renaissance movements started from roughly 1300 onwards across many regions of
Europe .
[ 37 ]
Origins
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 4 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Coluccio Salutati
In stark contrast to the High Middle Ages , when Latin scholars focused almost entirely on studying
Greek and Arabic works of natural science, philosophy and mathematics,
[ e ]
 R e n a i s s a n c e s c h o l a r s
were most interested in recovering and studying Latin and Greek literary, historical, and oratorical
texts. Broadly speaking, this began in the 14th century with a Latin phase, when Renaissance scholars
such  as  Petrarch , Coluccio  Salutati  (1331–1406),  Niccolò  de'  Niccoli  (1364–1437),  and  Poggio
Bracciolini  (1380–1459) scoured the libraries of Europe in search of works by such Latin authors as
Cicero , Lucretius , Livy , and Seneca .
[ 38 ]
 By the early 15th century, the bulk of the surviving such Latin
literature had been recovered; the Greek phase of Renaissance humanism was under way, as Western
European scholars turned to recovering ancient Greek literary, historical, oratorical and theological
texts.
[ 39 ]
Unlike with Latin texts, which had been preserved and studied in Western Europe since late antiquity,
the study of ancient Greek texts was very limited in medieval Western Europe. Ancient Greek works
on science, mathematics, and philosophy had been studied since the High Middle Ages  in Western
Europe and in the Islamic Golden Age  (normally in translation), but Greek literary, oratorical and
historical works (such as Homer , the Greek dramatists, Demosthenes  and Thucydides ) w e r e n o t
studied in either the Latin or medieval Islamic worlds ; in the Middle Ages these sorts of texts were
only studied by Byzantine scholars. Some argue that the Timurid Renaissance  in Samarkand  and
Herat , whose magnificence toned with Florence as the center of a cultural rebirth,
[ 40 ] [ 41 ]
 were linked to the Ottoman Empire , whose
conquests led to the migration of Greek scholars  to Italian cities.
[ 19 ] [ 42 ]
 One of the greatest achievements of Renaissance scholars was
to bring this entire class of Greek cultural works back into Western Europe for the first time since late antiquity.
Muslim  logicians, most notably Avicenna  and Averroes , had inherited Greek ideas after they had invaded and conquered Egypt  and
the Levant . Their translations and commentaries on these ideas worked their way through the Arab West into Iberia  and Sicily , which
became important centers for this transmission of ideas. Between the 11th and 13th centuries, many schools dedicated to the
translation of philosophical and scientific works from Classical Arabic  to Medieval Latin  were established in Iberia, most notably the
Toledo School of Translators . This work of translation from Islamic culture, though largely unplanned and disorganized, constituted
one of the greatest transmissions of ideas in history.
[ 43 ]
The movement to reintegrate the regular study of Greek literary, historical, oratorical, and theological texts back into the Western
European curriculum is usually dated to the 1396 invitation from Coluccio Salutati to the Byzantine diplomat and scholar Manuel
Chrysoloras  (c. 1355–1415) to teach Greek in Florence.
[ 44 ]
 This legacy was continued by a number of expatriate Greek scholars, from
Basilios Bessarion  to Leo Allatius .
Latin and Greek phases of Renaissance humanism
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 5 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
A political map of the Italian Peninsula  c.
1494
The unique political structures of Italy  during the Late Middle Ages  have led some to theorize
that its unusual social climate allowed the emergence of a rare cultural efflorescence. Italy
did not exist as a political entity  in the early modern period. Instead, it was divided into
smaller city-states  and territories: the Neapolitans  controlled the south, the Florentines  and
the Romans  at the center, the Milanese  and the Genoese  to the north and west respectively,
and the Venetians  to the north east. 15th-century Italy was one of the most urbanized  areas in
Europe.
[ 45 ]
 Many of its cities stood among the ruins of ancient Roman buildings; it seems
likely that the classical nature of the Renaissance was linked to its origin in the Roman
Empire's heartland.
[ 46 ]
Historian and political philosopher Quentin Skinner  points out that Otto of Freising  (c. 1114–
1158), a German bishop visiting north Italy during the 12th century, noticed a widespread
new form of political and social organization, observing that Italy appeared to have exited
from feudalism  so that its society was based on merchants and commerce. Linked to this was
anti-monarchical thinking, represented in the famous early Renaissance fresco  cycle The
Allegory of Good and Bad Government  by Ambrogio Lorenzetti  (painted 1338–1340), whose
strong  message  is  about  the  virtues  of  fairness,  justice,  republicanism  and  good
administration. Holding both Church and Empire  at bay, these city republics were devoted to
notions of  liberty. Skinner reports  that there  were many  defences  of  liberty  such as  the
Matteo Palmieri  (1406–1475) celebration of Florentine genius not only in art, sculpture and
architecture, but "the remarkable efflorescence of moral, social and political philosophy that
occurred in Florence at the same time".
[ 47 ]
Even cities and states beyond central Italy, such as the Republic of Florence at this time, were also notable for their merchant
republics , especially the Republic of Venice. Although in practice these were oligarchical , and bore little resemblance to a modern
democracy , they did have democratic features and were responsive states, with forms of participation in governance and belief in
liberty.
[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ]
 The relative political freedom they afforded was conducive to academic and artistic advancement.
[ 50 ]
 Likewise, the
position of Italian cities such as Venice as great trading centres made them intellectual crossroads. Merchants  brought with them
ideas from far corners of the globe, particularly the Levant . Venice was Europe's gateway to trade with the East, and a producer of
fine glass , while Florence was a capital of textiles. The wealth such business brought to Italy meant large public and private artistic
projects could be commissioned and individuals had more leisure time for study.
[ 50 ]
Social and political structures in Italy
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 6 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Pieter Bruegel 's The Triumph of Death
( c.  1562 ) reﬂects the social upheaval and
terror that followed the plague that
devastated medieval Europe.
One theory that has been advanced is that the devastation in Florence  caused by the Black
Death , which hit Europe between 1348 and 1350, resulted in a shift in the world view of
people in 14th century Italy. Italy  was particularly badly hit by the plague, and it has been
speculated that the resulting familiarity with death caused thinkers to dwell more on their
lives on Earth, rather than on spirituality  and the afterlife .
[ 51 ]
 It has also been argued that the
Black Death prompted a new wave of piety, manifested in the sponsorship  of religious works
of art.
[ 52 ]
 However, this does not fully explain why the Renaissance occurred specifically in
Italy in the 14th century. The Black Death was a pandemic  that affected all of Europe in the
ways described, not only Italy. The Renaissance's emergence in Italy was most likely the
result of the complex interaction of the above factors.
[ 22 ]
The plague was carried by fleas on sailing vessels returning from the ports of Asia, spreading
quickly due to lack of proper sanitation: the population of England , then about 4.2 million,
lost 1.4 million people to the bubonic plague . Florence's population was nearly halved in the
year 1348. As a result of the decimation in the populace the value of the working class increased, and commoners came to enjoy more
freedom. To answer the increased need for labor, workers traveled in search of the most favorable position economically.
[ 53 ]
The demographic decline due to the plague had economic consequences: the prices of food dropped and land values declined by 30–
40% in most parts of Europe between 1350 and 1400.
[ 54 ]
 Landholders faced a great loss, but for ordinary men and women it was a
windfall. The survivors of the plague found not only that the prices of food were cheaper but also that lands were more abundant, and
many of them inherited property from their dead relatives.
The spread of disease was significantly more rampant in areas of poverty. Epidemics  ravaged cities, particularly children. Plagues
were easily spread by lice, unsanitary drinking water, armies, or by poor sanitation. Children were hit the hardest because many
diseases, such as typhus  and congenital syphilis , target the immune system, leaving young children without a fighting chance.
Children in city dwellings were more affected by the spread of disease than the children of the wealthy.
[ 55 ]
The Black Death caused greater upheaval to Florence's social and political structure than later epidemics. Despite a significant
number of deaths among members of the ruling classes, the government of Florence continued to function during this period. Formal
meetings of elected representatives were suspended during the height of the epidemic due to the chaotic conditions in the city, but a
small group of officials was appointed to conduct the affairs of the city, which ensured continuity of government.
[ 56 ]
Black Death
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 7 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Lorenzo de' Medici , ruler of
Florence  and patron of arts
(portrait by Vasari )
It has long been a matter of debate why the Renaissance began in Florence , and not elsewhere in
Italy. Scholars have noted several features unique to Florentine cultural life that may have caused
such a cultural movement. Many have emphasized the role played by the Medici , a banking family
and later ducal ruling house , in patronizing and stimulating the arts. Some historians have postulated
that Florence was the birthplace of the Renaissance as a result of luck, i.e., because " Great Men " were
born there by chance:
[ 57 ]
 Leonardo, Botticelli and Michelangelo were all born in Tuscany . Arguing
that such chance seems improbable, other historians have contended that these "Great Men" were
only able to rise to prominence because of the prevailing cultural conditions at the time.
[ 58 ]
Lorenzo  de'  Medici  (1449–1492)  was  the  catalyst  for  an  enormous  amount  of  arts  patronage,
encouraging his countrymen to commission works from the leading artists of Florence, including
Leonardo  da  Vinci , Sandro  Botticelli , a n d Michelangelo  Buonarroti .
[ 18 ]
 Works  by  Neri  di  Bicci ,
Botticelli, Leonardo, and Filippino Lippi  had been commissioned additionally by the Convent of San
Donato in Scopeto in Florence.
[ 59 ]
The Renaissance was certainly underway before Lorenzo de' Medici came to power – indeed, before
the Medici family itself achieved hegemony in Florentine society.
In some ways, Renaissance humanism  was not a philosophy but a method of learning. In contrast to the medieval scholastic  mode,
which focused on resolving contradictions between authors, Renaissance humanists would study ancient texts in their original
languages and appraise them through a combination of reasoning and empirical evidence . Humanist education was based on the
programme of Studia Humanitatis , the study of five humanities: poetry , grammar , history , moral philosophy , and rhetoric . Although
historians have sometimes struggled to define humanism precisely, most have settled on "a middle of the road definition... the
movement to recover, interpret, and assimilate the language, literature, learning and values of ancient Greece and Rome".
[ 60 ]
 Above
all, humanists asserted "the genius of man ... the unique and extraordinary ability of the human mind".
[ 61 ]
Humanist scholars shaped the intellectual landscape throughout the early modern period. Political philosophers such as Niccolò
Cultural conditions in Florence
Characteristics
Humanism
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 8 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola ,
writer of the famous Oration on
the Dignity of Man , which has
been called the "Manifesto of
the Renaissance"
[ 62 ]
Machiavelli and Thomas More  revived the ideas of Greek and Roman thinkers and applied them in
critiques of contemporary government, following the Islamic steps of Ibn Khaldun .
[ 63 ] [ 64 ]
Pico della
Mirandola  wrote the "manifesto" of the Renaissance, the Oration on the Dignity of Man , a vibrant
defence of thinking. Matteo Palmieri  (1406–1475), another humanist, is most known for his work
Della  vita  civile  ("On  Civic  Life";  printed  1528),  which  advocated  civic  humanism ,  and  for  his
influence in refining the Tuscan vernacular  to the same level as Latin. Palmieri drew on Roman
philosophers and theorists, especially Cicero , who, like Palmieri, lived an active public life as a citizen
and official, as well as a theorist and philosopher and also Quintilian . Perhaps the most succinct
expression of his perspective on humanism is in a 1465 poetic work La città di vita , but an earlier
work, Della vita civile , is more wide-ranging. Composed as a series of dialogues set in a country house
in the Mugello countryside outside Florence during the plague of 1430, Palmieri expounds on the
qualities of the ideal citizen. The dialogues include ideas about how children develop mentally and
physically, how citizens can conduct themselves morally, how citizens and states can ensure probity in
public life, and an important debate on the difference between that which is pragmatically useful and
that which is honest.
The humanists believed that it is important to transcend to the afterlife with a perfect mind and body,
which could be attained with education. The purpose of humanism was to create a universal man
whose person combined intellectual and physical excellence and who was capable of functioning
honorably in virtually any situation.
[ 65 ]
 This ideology was referred to as the uomo universale ,  an  ancient  Greco-Roman  ideal.
Education during the Renaissance was mainly composed of ancient literature and history as it was thought that the classics provided
moral instruction and an intensive understanding of human behavior.
A unique characteristic of some Renaissance libraries is that they were open to the public. These libraries were places where ideas
were exchanged and where scholarship and reading were considered both pleasurable and beneficial to the mind and soul. As
freethinking was a hallmark of the age, many libraries contained a wide range of writers. Classical texts could be found alongside
humanist writings. These informal associations of intellectuals profoundly influenced Renaissance culture. An essential tool of
Renaissance librarianship was the catalog that listed, described, and classified a library's books.
[ 66 ]
 Some of the richest "bibliophiles"
built libraries as temples to books and knowledge. A number of libraries appeared as manifestations of immense wealth joined with a
love  of  books.  In  some  cases,  cultivated  library  builders  were  also  committed  to  offering  others  the  opportunity  to  use  their
collections. Prominent aristocrats and princes of the Church created great libraries for the use of their courts, called "court libraries",
and were housed in lavishly designed monumental buildings decorated with ornate woodwork, and the walls adorned with frescoes
Humanism and libraries
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 9 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Leonardo da Vinci 's Vitruvian Man  (c.
1490) demonstrates the effect writers of
Antiquity had on Renaissance thinkers.
Based on the speciﬁcations in Vitruvius '
De architectura  (1st century BC),
Leonardo tried to draw the perfectly
proportioned man. ( Gallerie
dell'Accademia , Venice )
(Murray, Stuart A.P.).
Renaissance art marks a cultural rebirth at the close of the Middle Ages and rise of the Modern world. One of the distinguishing
features of Renaissance art was its development of highly realistic linear perspective. Giotto di Bondone  (1267–1337) is credited with
first treating a painting as a window into space, but it was not until the demonstrations of architect Filippo Brunelleschi  (1377–1446)
and the subsequent writings of Leon Battista Alberti  (1404–1472) that perspective was formalized as an artistic technique.
[ 67 ]
The development of perspective  was part of a wider trend toward realism  in the arts.
[ 68 ]
Painters developed other techniques, studying light, shadow, and, famously in the case of
Leonardo da Vinci , human anatomy .  Underlying  these  changes  in  artistic  method  was  a
renewed desire to depict the beauty of nature and to unravel the axioms of aesthetics , with
the works of Leonardo, Michelangelo  and Raphael  representing artistic pinnacles that were
much imitated by other artists.
[ 69 ]
 Other notable artists include Sandro Botticelli , working
for  the  Medici  in  Florence,  Donatello ,  another  Florentine,  and  Titian  i n V e n i c e , a m o n g
others.
In the Low Countries , a particularly vibrant artistic culture developed. The work of Hugo van
der Goes  and Jan van Eyck  was particularly influential on the development of painting in
Italy, both technically with the introduction of oil paint  and canvas, and stylistically in terms
of naturalism in representation. Later, the work of Pieter Brueghel the Elder  would inspire
artists to depict themes of everyday life.
[ 70 ]
In  architecture,  Filippo  Brunelleschi  was  foremost  in  studying  the  remains  of  ancient
classical buildings. With rediscovered knowledge from the 1st-century writer Vitruvius  and
the flourishing discipline of mathematics, Brunelleschi formulated the Renaissance style that
emulated and improved on classical forms. His major feat of engineering was building the
dome of Florence Cathedral .
[ 71 ]
 Another building demonstrating this style is the Basilica of
Sant'Andrea,  Mantua ,  built  by  Alberti.  The  outstanding  architectural  work  of  the  High
Renaissance  was the rebuilding of St. Peter's Basilica , combining the skills of Bramante ,
Michelangelo, Raphael, Sangallo  and Maderno .
During the Renaissance, architects aimed to use columns, pilasters , and entablatures  as an
Art
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 10 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
The Cantino planisphere  (1502), the
earliest world map detailing Portuguese
maritime exploration
integrated system. The Roman orders types of columns are used: Tuscan  and Composite . These can either be structural, supporting
an arcade or architrave, or purely decorative, set against a wall in the form of pilasters. One of the first buildings to use pilasters as an
integrated  system  was  in  the  Old  Sacristy  (1421–1440)  by  Brunelleschi.
[ 72 ]
 Arches,  semi-circular  or  (in  the  Mannerist  s t y l e )
segmental, are often used in arcades, supported on piers or columns with capitals. There may be a section of entablature between the
capital and the springing of the arch. Alberti was one of the first to use the arch on a monumental. Renaissance vaults do not have
ribs; they are semi-circular or segmental and on a square plan, unlike the Gothic  vault, which is frequently rectangular.
Renaissance artists were not pagans, although they admired antiquity and kept some ideas and symbols of the medieval past. Nicola
Pisano  (c. 1220 – c. 1278) imitated classical forms by portraying scenes from the Bible. His Annunciation , from the Pisa Baptistry ,
demonstrates that classical models influenced Italian art before the Renaissance took root as a literary movement.
[ 73 ]
During the Renaissance, extending from 1450 to 1650,
[ 74 ]
 every continent was visited and
mostly mapped by Europeans, except the south polar continent now known as Antarctica .
This development is depicted in the large world map Nova Totius Terrarum Orbis Tabula
made  by  the  Dutch  cartographer  Joan  Blaeu  i n 1 6 4 8 t o c o m m e m o r a t e t h e Peace  of
Westphalia .
In 1492, Christopher Columbus  sailed across the Atlantic Ocean from Spain seeking a direct
route to India of the Delhi Sultanate .  He  accidentally  stumbled  upon  the  Americas,  but
believed  he  had  reached  the  East  Indies . B e t w e e n 1 5 1 9 a n d 1 5 2 2 , t h e Magellan–Elcano
expedition  achieved the first circumnavigation of Earth  in history,
[ 75 ]
 including  the  first
crossing of the Pacific by a European expedition, revealing the vast scale of that ocean.
[ 76 ]
The science historian David Wootton  argues that the discovery of continents that were completely unknown to the ancients  had a
profound impact on European intellectual life in the 16th century and was (along with the printing press ) one of the two key catalysts
for the Scientific Revolution .
[ 77 ]
The rediscovery of ancient texts and the invention of the printing press  in about 1440 democratized learning and allowed a faster
propagation of more widely distributed ideas.
[ 79 ]
 In the first period of the Italian Renaissance , humanists favored the study of
humanities  o v e r natural  philosophy  o r applied  mathematics ,  and  their  reverence  for  classical  sources  further  enshrined  the
Navigation and geography
Science
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 11 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Anonymous portrait of Nicolaus
Copernicus  ( c.  1580 )
Portrait of Luca Pacioli , father of
accounting, painted by Jacopo de'
Barbari ,
[ f ]
 1495 ( Museo di Capodimonte )
Aristotelian  and Ptolemaic  views of the universe. Writing around 1450, Nicholas of Cusa
claimed that the universe must be infinite in extent and therefore devoid of a center.
[ 80 ]
Science and art were intermingled in the early Renaissance, with polymath artists such as
Leonardo da Vinci  making observational drawings of anatomy and nature. Leonardo set up
controlled experiments in water flow, medical dissection, and systematic study of movement
and aerodynamics, and he devised principles of research method that led Fritjof Capra  to
classify him as the "father of modern science".
[ g ]
 Other examples of Da Vinci's contribution
during this period include machines designed to saw marbles and lift monoliths, and new
discoveries in acoustics, botany, geology, anatomy, and mechanics.
[ 82 ]
A suitable environment had developed to question classical scientific doctrine. The discovery
in 1492 of the New World  by Christopher Columbus  challenged the classical worldview.  The
works of Ptolemy (in geography) and Galen  (in medicine) were found to not always match
everyday observations.  As the Reformation and Counter-Reformation  clashed, the Northern
Renaissance  showed  a  decisive  shift  in  focus  from  Aristotelean  natural  philosophy  to
chemistry and the biological sciences (botany, anatomy, and medicine).
[ 83 ]
Copernicus, in De revolutionibus orbium coelestium  ( On the Revolutions of the Heavenly
Spheres ), posited that the Earth moved around the Sun . De humani corporis fabrica  ( On the
Workings of the Human Body ) by Andreas Vesalius , gave a new confidence to the role of
dissection , observation, and the mechanistic  view of anatomy.
[ 84 ]
Applied innovation extended to commerce. At the end of the 15th century, Luca Pacioli
published the first work on bookkeeping , making him the founder of accounting .
[ 10 ]
From this changing society emerged a common, unifying musical language, in particular the
polyphonic  s t y l e o f t h e Franco-Flemish  school.  The  development  of  printing  made
distribution of music possible on a wide scale. Demand for music as entertainment and as an
activity for educated amateurs increased with the emergence of a bourgeois class. Dissemination of chansons , motets , and masses
throughout Europe coincided with the unification of polyphonic practice into the fluid style that culminated in the second half of the
sixteenth century in the work of composers such as Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina , Orlande de Lassus , Tomás Luis de Victoria , and
Music
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 12 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Alexander VI , a Borgia  Pope
infamous for his corruption
William Byrd .
The new ideals of humanism, although more secular in some aspects, developed against a Christian
backdrop,  especially  in  the  Northern  Renaissance .  Much,  if  not  most,  of  the  new  art  was
commissioned by or in dedication to the Roman Catholic Church .
[ 30 ]
 However, the Renaissance had a
profound effect on contemporary theology , particularly in the way people perceived the relationship
between man and God.
[ 30 ]
 Many of the period's foremost theologians were followers of the humanist
method, including Erasmus , Huldrych Zwingli , Thomas More , Martin Luther , and John Calvin .
The Renaissance began in times of religious turmoil. The Late Middle Ages was a period of political
intrigue  surrounding  the  Papacy ,  culminating  in  the  Western  Schism , i n w h i c h t h r e e m e n
simultaneously claimed to be true Bishop  of Rome .
[ 85 ]
 While the schism was resolved by the Council
of Constance  (1414), a resulting reform movement known as Conciliarism  sought to limit the power of
the pope. Although the papacy eventually emerged supreme in ecclesiastical matters by the Fifth
Council of the Lateran  (1511), it was dogged by continued accusations of corruption, most famously in
the person of Pope Alexander VI , who was accused variously of simony , nepotism , and fathering
children  (most  of  whom  were  married  off,  presumably  for  the  consolidation  of  power)  while  a
cardinal .
[ 86 ]
Churchmen such as Erasmus and Luther proposed reform to the Church, often based on humanist textual criticism  of the New
Testament .
[ 30 ]
 In October 1517, Luther published the Ninety-five Theses , challenging papal authority and criticizing its perceived
corruption, particularly with regard to instances of sold indulgences .
[ h ]
 The 95 Theses led to the Reformation , a break with the
Roman Catholic Church that previously claimed hegemony in Western Europe . Humanism and the Renaissance therefore played a
direct role in sparking the Reformation, as well as in many other contemporaneous religious debates and conflicts.
Pope Paul III  came to the papal throne (1534–1549) after the sack of Rome in 1527 , with uncertainties prevalent in the Catholic
Church following the Reformation. Nicolaus Copernicus dedicated De revolutionibus orbium coelestium  (On the Revolutions of the
Celestial Spheres) to Paul III, who became the grandfather of Alessandro Farnese , who had paintings by Titian , Michelangelo , and
Raphael , as well as an important collection of drawings, and who commissioned the masterpiece of Giulio Clovio , arguably the last
major illuminated manuscript , the Farnese Hours .
Religion
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 13 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Adoration of the Magi  and Solomon
adored by the Queen of Sheba  from the
Farnese Hours  (1546) by Giulio Clovio
marks the end of the Italian Renaissance
of illuminated manuscript  together with
the Index Librorum Prohibitorum .
Leonardo Bruni
By  the  15th  century,  writers,  artists,  and  architects  in  Italy  were  well  aware  of  the
transformations that were taking place and were using phrases such as modi antichi  (in the
antique  manner)  or  alle  romana  et  alla  antica  (in  the  manner  of  the  Romans  and  the
ancients) to describe their work. In the 1330s Petrarch  referred to pre-Christian times as
antiqua  (ancient) and to the Christian period as nova  (new).
[ 87 ]
 From  Petrarch's  Italian
perspective, this new period (which included his own time) was an age of national eclipse.
[ 87 ]
Leonardo Bruni  was the first to use tripartite periodization  in his History of the Florentine
People  (1442).
[ 88 ]
 Bruni's first two periods were based on those of Petrarch, but he added a
third period because he believed that Italy was no longer in a state of decline. Flavio Biondo
used  a  similar  framework  in  Decades  of  History  from  the  Deterioration  of  the  Roman
Empire  (1439–1453).
Humanist  historians  argued  that  contemporary  scholarship  restored  direct  links  to  the
classical period, thus bypassing the Medieval period, which they then named for the first time
the "Middle Ages". The term first appears in Latin in 1469 as media tempestas  (middle
times).
[ 89 ]
 The term rinascita  (rebirth) first appeared, however, in its broad sense in Giorgio
Vasari 's Lives of the Artists , 1550, revised 1568.
[ 90 ] [ 91 ]
 Vasari divides the age into three phases: the
first phase contains Cimabue , Giotto , and Arnolfo di Cambio ; the second phase contains Masaccio ,
Brunelleschi , a n d Donatello ; t h e t h i r d c e n t e r s o n Leonardo  da  Vinci  and  culminates  with
Michelangelo .  It  was  not  just  the  growing  awareness  of  classical  antiquity  that  drove  this
development, according to Vasari, but also the growing desire to study and imitate nature.
[ 92 ]
In the 15th century, the Renaissance spread rapidly from its birthplace in Florence to the rest of Italy
and soon to the rest of Europe. The invention of the printing press  by German printer Johannes
Gutenberg  allowed the rapid transmission of these new ideas. As it spread, its ideas diversified and
changed, being adapted to local culture. In the 20th century, scholars began to break the Renaissance
into regional and national movements.
Self-awareness
Spread
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 14 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
"What a piece of work is a
man, how noble in reason, how
inﬁnite in faculties, in form and
moving how express and
admirable, in action how like an
angel, in apprehension how
like a god!" – from William
Shakespeare 's Hamlet
The Elizabethan era  in the second half of the 16th century is usually regarded as the height of the
English Renaissance. Many scholars see its beginnings in the early 16th century during the reign of
Henry VIII .
[ 93 ]
The English Renaissance is different from the Italian Renaissance  in several ways. The dominant art
forms of the English Renaissance were literature  and music , which had a rich flowering.
[ 94 ]
Visual
arts  in the  English  Renaissance  were  much  less  significant than  in  the  Italian  Renaissance.  The
English Renaissance period in art began far later than the Italian, which had moved into Mannerism
by the 1530s.
[ 95 ]
In literature the later part of the 16th century saw the flowering of Elizabethan literature , with poetry
heavily influenced by Italian Renaissance literature  but Elizabethan theatre  a distinctive native style.
Writers  include  William  Shakespeare  (1564–1616),  Christopher  Marlowe  (1564–1593),  Edmund
Spenser  (1552–1599), Sir Thomas More  (1478–1535), and Sir Philip Sidney  (1554–1586). English
Renaissance music  competed with that in Europe with composers such as Thomas Tallis  (1505–1585),
John Taverner  (1490–1545), and William Byrd  (1540–1623). Elizabethan architecture  produced the
large prodigy houses  of courtiers, and in the next century Inigo Jones  (1573–1652), who introduced
Palladian architecture  to England.
[ 96 ]
Elsewhere,  Sir  Francis  Bacon  (1561–1626)  was  the  pioneer  of  modern  scientific  thought,  and  is
commonly regarded as one of the founders of the Scientific Revolution .
[ 97 ] [ 98 ]
The word "Renaissance" is borrowed from the French language, where it means "re-birth". It was first used in the eighteenth century
and was later popularized by French historian Jules Michelet  (1798–1874) in his 1855 work, Histoire de France  (History of France).
[ 99 ] [ 100 ]
In 1495 the Italian Renaissance  arrived in France, imported by King Charles VIII  after his invasion of Italy. A factor that promoted
the spread of secularism was the inability of the Church to offer assistance against the Black Death . Francis I  imported Italian art and
artists, including Leonardo da Vinci , Primaticcio , Rosso Fiorentino , Niccolò dell'Abbate  and Benvenuto Cellini  and built ornate
palaces at great expense, like the Palace of Fontainebleau  and the castle of Chambord . Writers such as François Rabelais , Pierre de
Ronsard , Joachim du Bellay , and Michel de Montaigne , painters such as Jean Clouet  and François Clouet , and musicians such as
England
France
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 15 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Château de Chambord  (1519–1547), one
of the most famous examples of
Renaissance architecture
Portrait of Emperor Maximilian
I , by Albrecht Dürer , 1519
Jean Mouton  also borrowed from the spirit of the Renaissance. French Renaissance sculptors
include Michel Colombe , Jean Goujon , Pierre Bontemps , Ligier Richier  and Germain Pilon
while important architects of the time were Pierre Lescot , who built the Henri II aisle of the
Louvre , Philibert Delorme  and Jacques I Androuet du Cerceau .
In 1533, a fourteen-year-old Catherine de' Medici  (1519–1589), born in Florence to Lorenzo
de' Medici, Duke of Urbino  and Madeleine de La Tour d'Auvergne , married Henry  II  of
France , second son of King Francis I and Queen Claude . Though she became famous and
infamous for her role in the French Wars of Religion , she made a direct contribution in
bringing arts, sciences, and music (including the origins of ballet ) to the French court from
her native Florence.
In  the  second  half  of  the  15th  century,  the  Renaissance  spirit  spread  to  Germany  a n d t h e Low
Countries , where the development of the printing press (ca. 1450) and Renaissance artists such as
Albrecht Dürer  (1471–1528) predated the influence from Italy. In the early Protestant areas of the
country humanism  became closely linked to the turmoil of the Reformation, and the art and writing
of  the  German  Renaissance  frequently  reflected  this  dispute.
[ 101 ]
 H o w e v e r , t h e Gothic  style  a n d
medieval scholastic philosophy remained exclusively until the turn of the 16th century. Emperor
Maximilian I  of Habsburg  (ruling 1493–1519) was the first truly Renaissance monarch of the Holy
Roman Empire .
After  Italy,  Hungary  was  the  first  European  country  where  the  Renaissance  appeared.
[ 102 ]
 T h e
Renaissance style came directly from Italy during the Quattrocento  (1400s) to Hungary first in the
Central European region, thanks to the development of early Hungarian-Italian relationships — not
only in dynastic connections, but also in cultural, humanistic and commercial relations – growing in
strength from the 14th century. The relationship between Hungarian and Italian Gothic styles was a
second reason – exaggerated breakthrough of walls is avoided, preferring clean and light structures. Large-scale building schemes
provided ample and long term work for the artists, for example, the building of the Friss (New) Castle in Buda , the castles of
Visegrád, Tata , and Várpalota. In Sigismund 's court there were patrons such as Pippo Spano , a descendant of the Scolari family of
Florence, who invited Manetto Ammanatini and Masolino da Pannicale  to Hungary.
[ 103 ]
Germany
Hungary
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 16 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
The  new  Italian  trend  combined  with  existing  national  traditions  to  create  a  particular  local  Renaissance  art.  Acceptance  of
Renaissance art was furthered by the continuous arrival of humanist thought in the country. Many young Hungarians studying at
Italian universities came closer to the Florentine  humanist center, so a direct connection with Florence evolved. The growing number
of Italian traders moving to Hungary, specially to Buda , helped this process. New thoughts were carried by the humanist prelates,
among them Vitéz János , archbishop of Esztergom , one of the founders of Hungarian humanism.
[ 104 ]
 During the long reign of
Emperor Sigismund of Luxemburg the Royal Castle of Buda became probably the largest Gothic  palace of the late Middle Ages . King
Matthias Corvinus  (r. 1458–1490) rebuilt the palace in early Renaissance style and further expanded it.
[ 105 ] [ 106 ]
After the marriage in 1476 of King Matthias to Beatrice of Naples , Buda  became one of the most important artistic centers of the
Renaissance north of the Alps .
[ 107 ]
 The most important humanists living in Matthias' court were Antonio Bonfini  and the famous
Hungarian  poet  Janus  Pannonius .
[ 107 ]
András  Hess  set  up  a  printing  press  in  Buda  in  1472.  Matthias  Corvinus's  library,  the
Bibliotheca Corviniana , was Europe's greatest collections of secular books: historical chronicles, philosophic and scientific works in
the 15th century. His library was second only in size to the Vatican Library . (However, the Vatican Library mainly contained Bibles
and religious materials.)
[ 108 ]
 In 1489, Bartolomeo della Fonte of Florence wrote that Lorenzo de' Medici founded his own Greek-
Latin library encouraged by the example of the Hungarian king. Corvinus's library is part of UNESCO World Heritage.
[ 109 ]
Matthias started at least two major building projects.
[ 110 ]
 The works in Buda and Visegrád  began in about 1479.
[ 111 ]
 Two new wings
and a hanging garden  were built at the royal castle of Buda, and the palace at Visegrád was rebuilt in Renaissance style.
[ 111 ] [ 112 ]
Matthias  appointed  the  Italian  Chimenti  Camicia  and  the  Dalmatian  Giovanni  Dalmata  to  direct  these  projects.
[ 111 ]
 M a t t h i a s
commissioned the leading Italian artists of his age to embellish his palaces: for instance, the sculptor Benedetto da Majano  and the
painters Filippino Lippi  and Andrea Mantegna  worked for him.
[ 113 ]
 A copy of Mantegna's portrait of Matthias survived.
[ 114 ]
 Matthias
also hired the Italian military engineer Aristotele Fioravanti  to direct the rebuilding of the forts along the southern frontier.
[ 115 ]
 He
had new monasteries built in Late Gothic  style for the Franciscans  in Kolozsvár, Szeged  and Hunyad, and for the Paulines  i n
Fejéregyháza.
[ 116 ] [ 117 ]
 In the spring of 1485, Leonardo da Vinci  travelled to Hungary  on behalf of Sforza to meet King Matthias
Corvinus, and was commissioned by him to paint a Madonna .
[ 118 ]
Matthias  enjoyed  the  company  of  Humanists  and  had  lively  discussions  on  various  topics  with  them.
[ 119 ]
 The  fame  of  his
magnanimity  encouraged  many  scholars—mostly  Italian—to  settle  in  Buda.
[ 120 ]
 Antonio  Bonfini,  Pietro  Ranzano , B a r t o l o m e o
Fonzio, and Francesco Bandini  spent many years in Matthias's court.
[ 121 ] [ 119 ]
 This circle of educated men introduced the ideas of
Neoplatonism  to Hungary.
[ 122 ] [ 123 ]
 Like all intellectuals of his age, Matthias was convinced that the movements and combinations of
the stars and planets exercised influence on individuals' life and on the history of nations.
[ 124 ]
Martius Galeotti  described him as
"king and astrologer", and Antonio Bonfini said Matthias "never did anything without consulting the stars".
[ 125 ]
 Upon his request,
the famous astronomers of the age, Johannes Regiomontanus  and Marcin Bylica , set up an observatory in Buda and installed it with
astrolabes  and celestial globes .
[ 126 ]
 Regiomontanus dedicated his book on navigation that was used by Christopher Columbus  to
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 17 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Erasmus of Rotterdam  in 1523,
as depicted by Hans Holbein
the Younger
Matthias.
[ 120 ]
Other important figures of Hungarian Renaissance include Bálint Balassi  (poet), Sebestyén Tinódi Lantos  (poet), Bálint Bakfark
(composer and lutenist), and Master MS  (fresco painter).
Culture in the Netherlands at the end of the 15th century was influenced by the Italian Renaissance
through trade via Bruges , which made Flanders wealthy. Its nobles commissioned artists who became
known across Europe.
[ 127 ]
 In science, the anatomist Andreas Vesalius  led the way; in cartography ,
Gerardus Mercator 's map assisted explorers and navigators. In art, Dutch and Flemish Renaissance
painting  ranged from the strange work of Hieronymus Bosch
[ 128 ]
 to the everyday life depictions of
Pieter Brueghel the Elder .
[ 127 ]
Erasmus was arguably the Netherlands' best known humanist and Catholic intellectual during the
Renaissance.
[ 37 ]
The  Renaissance  in  Northern  Europe  has  been  termed  the  "Northern  Renaissance".  While
Renaissance ideas were moving north from Italy, there was a simultaneous southward spread of some
areas of innovation, particularly in music .
[ 129 ]
 The music of the 15th-century Burgundian School
defined the beginning of the Renaissance in music, and the polyphony  of the Netherlanders , as it
moved with the musicians themselves into Italy, formed the core of the first true international style in
music  since the standardization of Gregorian Chant  in the 9th century.
[ 129 ]
 The culmination of the
Netherlandish school was in the music of the Italian composer Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina . At the end of the 16th century Italy
again became a center of musical innovation, with the development of the polychoral style of the Venetian School , which spread
northward into Germany around 1600. In Denmark , the Renaissance sparked the translation of the works of Saxo Grammaticus  into
Danish  as well as Frederick II  and Christian IV  ordering the redecoration or construction of several important works of architecture,
i.e. Kronborg , Rosenborg  and Børsen .
[ 130 ]
 Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe  greatly contributed to turn astronomy into the first
modern science  and also helped launch the Scientific Revolution .
[ 131 ] [ 132 ]
The paintings of the Italian Renaissance differed from those of the Northern Renaissance. Italian Renaissance artists were among the
first to paint secular scenes, breaking away from the purely religious art of medieval painters. Northern Renaissance artists initially
Low Countries
Northern Europe
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 18 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
A 16th-century Renaissance tombstone of
Polish kings within the Sigismund Chapel  in
Kraków , Poland. The golden-domed chapel
was designed by Bartolommeo Berrecci .
remained focused on religious subjects, such as the contemporary religious upheaval portrayed by Albrecht Dürer . Later, the works
of Pieter Bruegel the Elder  influenced artists to paint scenes of daily life rather than religious or classical themes. It was also during
the Northern Renaissance that Flemish  brothers Hubert  and Jan van Eyck  perfected the oil painting  technique, which enabled artists
to produce strong colors on a hard surface that could survive for centuries.
[ 133 ]
 A feature of the Northern Renaissance was its use of
the vernacular in place of Latin or Greek, which allowed greater freedom of expression. This movement had started in Italy with the
decisive influence of Dante Alighieri  on the development of vernacular languages; in fact the focus on writing in Italian has neglected
a major source of Florentine ideas expressed in Latin.
[ 134 ]
 The spread of the printing press technology boosted the Renaissance in
Northern Europe as elsewhere, with Venice becoming a world center of printing.
The Polish Renaissance lasted from the late 15th to the late 16th century and was the
Golden Age  of Polish culture . Ruled by the Jagiellonian dynasty , the Kingdom of Poland
(from 1569 known as the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth ) actively participated in the
broad European Renaissance. An early Italian humanist who came to Poland in the
mid-15th century  was  Filippo Buonaccorsi ,  who  was  employed  as  royal  advisor  and
councillor. The tomb of John I Albert , completed in 1505 by Francesco Fiorentino , is the
first example of a Renaissance composition in the country.
[ 135 ] [ 136 ]
 Many Italian artists
subsequently  came  to  Poland  with  Bona  Sforza  o f Milan , w h e n s h e m a r r i e d K i n g
Sigismund I  in 1518.
[ 137 ]
 This was supported by temporarily strengthened monarchies in
both areas, as well as by newly established universities.
[ 138 ]
The  Renaissance  was  a  period  when  the  multi-national  Polish  state  experienced  a
substantial period of cultural growth thanks in part to a century without major wars,
aside  from  conflicts  in  the  sparsely  populated  eastern  and  southern  borderlands .
Architecture became more refined and decorative. Mannerism  played an important part
in shaping what is now considered to be the truly Polish architectural style – high attics
above the cornice  w i t h p i n n a c l e s a n d pilasters .
[ 139 ]
 It was also the time when the first major works of Polish literature  w e r e
published, particularly those of Mikołaj Rey  and Jan Kochanowski , and the Polish language  became the lingua franca  of East-Central
Europe.
[ 140 ]
 The Jagiellonian University  transformed into a major institution of higher education for the region and hosted many
notable scholars, chiefly Nicolaus Copernicus  and Conrad Celtes . Three more academies were founded at Königsberg  (1544), Vilnius
(1579), and Zamość  (1594). The Reformation spread peacefully throughout the country, giving rise to the Nontrinitarian Polish
Brethren .
[ 141 ]
 Living conditions improved, cities grew, and exports of agricultural products enriched the population, especially the
nobility ( szlachta ) and magnates . The nobles gained dominance in the new political system of Golden Liberty , a counterweight to
Poland
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 19 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Luís de Camões , and his
seminal work Os Lusíadas , are
considered the greatest poet of
the Portuguese language  and
the pinnacle of Portuguese
literature , respectively.
The renaissance cloister at the Convent
of Christ  in Tomar
monarchical absolutism .
[ 142 ]
Although Italian Renaissance had a modest impact in Portuguese arts, Portugal  was influential in
broadening the European worldview,
[ 143 ]
 stimulating humanist inquiry. Renaissance arrived through
the influence of wealthy Italian and Flemish merchants who invested in the profitable commerce
overseas. As the pioneer headquarters of European exploration, Lisbon  flourished in the late 15th
century, attracting experts who made several breakthroughs in mathematics, astronomy and naval
technology,  including  Pedro  Nunes , João  de  Castro , Abraham  Zacuto , a n d Martin  Behaim .
Cartographers Pedro Reinel , Lopo Homem , Estêvão Gomes , and Diogo Ribeiro  made crucial advances
in mapping the world. Apothecary Tomé Pires  and physicians Garcia de Orta  and Cristóvão da Costa
collected and published works on plants and medicines, soon translated by Flemish pioneer botanist
Carolus Clusius .
In architecture, the huge profits of the spice trade  financed a sumptuous composite style in the first
decades  of  the  16th  century,  the  Manueline , i n c o r p o r a t i n g m a r i t i m e e l e m e n t s .
[ 144 ]
 T h e p r i m a r y
painters were Nuno Gonçalves , Gregório Lopes , and Vasco Fernandes . In music, Pedro de Escobar
and Duarte Lobo  produced four songbooks, including the Cancioneiro de Elvas .
In literature, Luís de Camões  inscribed the Portuguese feats
overseas  in  the  epic  poem  Os  Lusíadas . Sá  de  Miranda
introduced Italian forms of verse and Bernardim Ribeiro  developed pastoral romance , while
plays  by  Gil  Vicente  fused  it  with  popular  culture,  reporting  the  changing  times.  Travel
literature  especially  flourished:  João  de  Barros , Fernão  Lopes  de  Castanheda , António
Galvão , Gaspar Correia , Duarte Barbosa , and Fernão Mendes Pinto , among others, described
new lands and were translated and spread with the new printing press.
[ 143 ]
 After joining the
Portuguese exploration of Brazil in 1500, Amerigo Vespucci  coined the term New World ,
[ 145 ]
in his letters to Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici .
The  intense  international  exchange  produced  several  cosmopolitan  humanist  scholars,
including Francisco de Holanda , André de Resende , and Damião de Góis , a friend of Erasmus
who wrote with rare independence on the reign of King Manuel I . Diogo de Gouveia  and
André de Gouveia  made relevant teaching reforms via France. Foreign news and products in the Portuguese factory  in Antwerp
Portugal
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 20 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
The Royal Monastery of San Lorenzo del
Escorial , by Juan de Herrera  and Juan
Bautista de Toledo
attracted the interest of Thomas More
[ 146 ]
 and Albrecht Dürer  to the wider world.
[ 147 ]
 There, profits and know-how helped nurture
the  Dutch  Renaissance  a n d Golden  Age ,  especially  after  the  arrival  of  the  wealthy  cultured  Jewish  community  expelled  from
Portugal .
The Renaissance arrived in the Iberian peninsula through the Mediterranean possessions of
the Crown of Aragon  and the city of Valencia . Many early Spanish Renaissance writers come
from the Crown of Aragon, including Ausiàs March  and Joanot Martorell . In the Crown of
Castile , the early Renaissance was heavily influenced by the Italian humanism, starting with
writers and poets such as Íñigo López de Mendoza, marqués de Santillana , who introduced
the  new  Italian  poetry  to  Spain  in  the  early  15th  century.  Other  writers,  such  as  Jorge
Manrique , Fernando de Rojas , Juan del Encina , Juan Boscán Almogáver , and Garcilaso de la
Vega , kept a close resemblance to the Italian canon. Miguel de Cervantes 's masterpiece Don
Quixote  is credited as the first Western novel. Renaissance humanism flourished in the early
16th  century,  with  influential  writers  such  as  philosopher  Juan  Luis  Vives , g r a m m a r i a n
Antonio de Nebrija  and natural historian Pedro de Mexía . The poet and philosopher Luisa de
Medrano , celebrated among her Renaissance contemporaries as one of the puellae doctae
("learned girls"), was the first female professor in Europe at the University of Salamanca .
Later Spanish Renaissance tended toward religious themes and mysticism, with poets such as Luis de León , Teresa of Ávila , and
John of the Cross , and treated issues related to the exploration of the New World , with chroniclers and writers such as Inca Garcilaso
de la Vega  and Bartolomé de las Casas , giving rise to a body of work, now known as Spanish Renaissance literature . T h e l a t e
Renaissance in Spain produced political and religious authors such as Tomás Fernández de Medrano  and artists such as El Greco  and
composers such as Tomás Luis de Victoria  and Antonio de Cabezón .
▪ Renaissance in Croatia
▪ Renaissance in Scotland
Spain
Further countries
Historiography
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 21 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
A cover of the Lives of the Artists  by
Giorgio Vasari
The Italian artist and critic Giorgio Vasari  (1511–1574) first used the term rinascita  in his
book The Lives of the Artists  (published 1550). In the book Vasari attempted to define what
he described as a break with the barbarities of Gothic art : the arts (he held) had fallen into
decay with the collapse of the Roman Empire  and only the Tuscan  artists, beginning with
Cimabue  (1240–1301)  and  Giotto  (1267–1337)  began  to  reverse  this  decline  in  the  arts.
Vasari saw ancient art as central to the rebirth of Italian art.
[ 148 ]
However, only in the 19th century did the French word renaissance  achieve popularity in
describing the self-conscious cultural movement based on revival of Roman models that
began in the late 13th century. French historian Jules Michelet  (1798–1874) defined "The
Renaissance" in his 1855 work Histoire de France  as an entire historical period, whereas
previously it had been used in a more limited sense.
[ 27 ]
 For Michelet, the Renaissance was
more a development in science than in art and culture. He asserted that it spanned the period
from Columbus  to Copernicus  to Galileo ; that is, from the end of the 15th century to the
middle of the 17th century.
[ 99 ]
 Moreover, Michelet distinguished between what he called,
"the bizarre and monstrous" quality of the Middle Ages and the democratic  values that he, as
a vocal Republican , chose to see in its character.
[ 22 ]
 A  French  nationalist,  Michelet  also
sought to claim the Renaissance as a French movement.
[ 22 ]
The Swiss  historian Jacob Burckhardt  (1818–1897) in his The Civilization of the Renaissance
in Italy  (1860), by contrast, defined the Renaissance as the period between Giotto  and Michelangelo  in Italy, that is, the 14th to
mid-16th centuries. He saw in the Renaissance the emergence of the modern spirit of individuality , which the Middle Ages had
stifled.
[ 149 ]
 His  book  was  widely  read  and  became  influential  in  the  development  of  the  modern  interpretation  of  the  Italian
Renaissance .
[ 150 ]
More recently, some historians have been much less keen to define the Renaissance as a historical age, or even as a coherent cultural
movement. The historian Randolph Starn, of the University of California Berkeley , stated in 1998:
Rather than a period with definitive beginnings and endings and consistent content in between, the Renaissance can be
(and occasionally has been) seen as a movement of practices and ideas to which specific groups and identifiable persons
variously responded in different times and places. It would be in this sense a network of diverse, sometimes converging,
sometimes conflicting cultures, not a single, time-bound culture.
[ 24 ]
Conception
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 22 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Painting of the St. Bartholomew's Day
Massacre , an event in the French Wars
of Religion , by François Dubois
There  is  debate  about  the  extent  to  which  the  Renaissance  improved  on  the  culture  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Both  Michelet  and
Burckhardt were keen to describe the progress made in the Renaissance toward the modern age . Burckhardt likened the change to a
veil being removed from man's eyes, allowing him to see clearly.
[ 57 ]
In the Middle Ages both sides of human consciousness – that which was turned within as that which was turned without –
lay dreaming or half awake beneath a common veil. The veil was woven of faith, illusion, and childish prepossession,
through which the world and history were seen clad in strange hues.
[ 151 ]
—  Jacob Burckhardt, The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy
On the other hand, many historians now point out that most of the negative social factors
popularly  associated  with  the  medieval  period   – poverty, warfare,  religious  and  political
persecution,  for  example   –  seem  to  have  worsened  in  this  era,  which  saw  the  rise  of
Machiavellian politics, the Wars of Religion , the corrupt Borgia Popes , and the intensified
witch-hunts  of the 16th century. Many people who lived during the Renaissance did not view
it as the " golden age " imagined by certain 19th-century authors, but were concerned by these
social maladies.
[ 152 ]
 Significantly, though, the artists, writers, and patrons involved in the
cultural movements in question believed they were living in a new era that was a clean break
from the Middle Ages.
[ 90 ]
 Some Marxist historians  prefer to describe the Renaissance in
material terms, holding the view that the changes in art, literature, and philosophy were part
of a general economic trend from feudalism  toward capitalism , resulting in a bourgeois  class
with leisure time to devote to the arts.
[ 153 ]
Johan Huizinga  (1872–1945) acknowledged the existence of the Renaissance but questioned whether it was a positive change. In his
book The Autumn of the Middle Ages , he argued that the Renaissance was a period of decline from the High Middle Ages , destroying
much that was important.
[ 23 ]
 The Medieval Latin  language, for instance, had evolved greatly from the classical period and was still a
living language used in the church and elsewhere. The Renaissance obsession with classical purity halted its further evolution and
saw Latin  revert to its classical form. This view is however somewhat contested by recent studies . Robert S. Lopez has contended that
it was a period of deep economic recession .
[ 154 ]
 Meanwhile, George Sarton  and Lynn Thorndike  have both argued that scientific
progress was perhaps less original than has traditionally been supposed.
[ 155 ]
 Finally, Joan Kelly  argued that the Renaissance led to
greater gender dichotomy, lessening the agency women had had during the Middle Ages.
[ 156 ]
Debates about progress
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 23 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Some historians have begun to consider the word Renaissance  to be unnecessarily loaded, implying an unambiguously positive
rebirth from the supposedly more primitive " Dark Ages ", the Middle Ages. Most political and economic historians now prefer to use
the term " early modern " for this period (and a considerable period afterwards), a designation intended to highlight the period as a
transitional one between the Middle Ages and the modern era.
[ 157 ]
 Others such as Roger Osborne have come to consider the Italian
Renaissance as a repository of the myths and ideals of western history in general, and instead of rebirth of ancient ideas as a period
of great innovation.
[ 158 ]
The art historian Erwin Panofsky  observed of this resistance to the concept of "Renaissance":
It is perhaps no accident that the factuality of the Italian Renaissance  has been most vigorously questioned by those who
are not obliged to take a professional interest in the aesthetic aspects of civilization – historians of economic and social
developments,  political  and  religious  situations,  and,  most  particularly,  natural  science  –  but  only  exceptionally  by
students of literature and hardly ever by historians of Art.
[ 159 ]
The term Renaissance  has also been used to define periods outside of the 15th and 16th centuries in the earlier Medieval period .
Charles H. Haskins  (1870–1937), for example, made a case for a Renaissance of the 12th century .
[ 160 ]
 Other historians have argued
for  a  Carolingian  Renaissance  in  the  8th  and  9th  centuries,  Ottonian  Renaissance  in  the  10th  century  and  for  the  Timurid
Renaissance  of the 14th century. The Islamic Golden Age  has been also sometimes termed with the Islamic Renaissance.
[ 161 ]
 The
Macedonian Renaissance  is a term used for a period in the Roman Empire in the 9th-11th centuries CE.
Other periods of cultural rebirth in Modern times  have also been termed "renaissances", such as the Bengal Renaissance , Tamil
Renaissance , Nepal Bhasa renaissance , al-Nahda  or the Harlem Renaissance . The term can also be used in cinema. In animation, the
Disney Renaissance  is a period that spanned the years from 1989 to 1999 which saw the studio return to the level of quality not
witnessed since their Golden Age of Animation . The San Francisco Renaissance  was a vibrant period of exploratory poetry and fiction
writing in San Francisco  in the mid-20th century.
▪ Index of Renaissance articles
Other Renaissances
See also
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 24 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
Society portal
Arts portal
▪ Outline of the Renaissance
▪ List of Renaissance ﬁgures
▪ List of Renaissance structures
▪ Roman Renaissance
▪ Venetian Renaissance
a. French: [ ʁə n ɛ sɑ ̃ s]
⡑
, meaning 'rebirth', from renaître  'to be
born again'; Italian : Rinascimento [rinaʃʃiˈmento] , from
rinascere , with the same meanings.
[ 3 ]
b. The Oxford English Dictionary  cites W Dyce and C H
Wilson's Letter to Lord Meadowbank  (1837): "A style
possessing many points of rude resemblance with the more
elegant and reﬁned character of the art of the renaissance in
Italy." And the following year in Civil Engineer & Architect's
Journal : "Not that we consider the style of the Renaissance to
be either pure or good per se." See Oxford English
Dictionary, "Renaissance"
c. "Historians of different kinds will often make some choice
between a long Renaissance (say, 1300–1600), a short one
(1453–1527), or somewhere in between (the ﬁfteenth and
sixteenth centuries, as is commonly adopted in music
histories)."
[ 11 ]
 Or between Petrarch  and Jonathan Swift , an
even longer period.
[ 12 ]
 Another source dates it from 1350 to
1620.
[ 13 ]
d. Some scholars have called for an end to the use of the term,
which they see as a product of presentism  – the use of
history  to validate and glorify modern ideals.
[ 26 ]
e. For information on this earlier, very different approach to a
different set of ancient texts (scientiﬁc texts rather than
cultural texts) see Latin translations of the 12th century , and
Islamic contributions to Medieval Europe .
f. It is thought that Leonardo da Vinci  may have painted the
rhombicuboctahedron .
[ 78 ]
g. Exhaustive 2007 study by Fritjof Capra shows that Leonardo
was a much greater scientist than previously thought, and not
just an inventor. Leonardo was innovative in science theory
and in conducting actual science practice. In Capra's detailed
assessment of many surviving manuscripts, Leonardo's
science in tune with holistic non-mechanistic and non-
reductive approaches to science, which are becoming
popular today.
[ 81 ]
h. It is sometimes thought that the Church, as an institution,
formally sold indulgences at the time. This, however, was not
the practice. Donations were often received, but only
mandated by individuals that were condemned.
References
Explanatory notes
Citations
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 25 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
1. "renaissance"  ( https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/eng
lish/renaissance ) . Cambridge Dictionary . Retrieved 4 April
2024 .
2. Wells, John  (2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary
(3rd ed.). Pearson Longman. ISBN 978-1405881180 .
3. "Online Etymology Dictionary: "Renaissance" "  ( http://www.et
ymonline.com/index.php?search=renaissance&searchmode=
none ) . Etymonline.com . Retrieved 31 July  2009 .
4. Casini, Lorenzo. " Renaissance Philosophy  ( https://iep.utm.ed
u/renaissa/ ) ". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Accessed
December 2025.
5. " Renaissance  ( https://www.history.com/articles/renaissance ) ".
History . A&E Television Networks, LLC., April 2018.
6. "Renaissance"  ( https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/en
glish/Renaissance ) . Cambridge Dictionaries  (Online).
Cambridge University Press. n.d.
7. Brotton, Jerry (2006). The Renaissance: a very short
introduction  (1. publ ed.). Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. p. 9.
ISBN 978-0-19-280163-0 .
8. "Learn about Leonardo da Vinci"  ( https://www.bbc.co.uk/scien
ce/leonardo/ ) . BBC Science . Retrieved 26 October  2025 .
9. "Michelangelo"  ( https://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_ﬁgure
s/michelangelo.shtml ) . BBC History . Retrieved 26 October
2025 .
10. Diwan, Jaswith. Accounting Concepts & Theories . London:
Morre. pp.  1– 2. id# 94452.
11. The Cambridge History of Seventeenth-Century Music:
Volume 1 , p. 4, 2005, Cambridge University Press, Google
Books  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=mHJvKVq0vXoC
&pg=PA4 ) .
12. See Rosalie L. Colie, quoted in Hageman, Elizabeth H., in
Women and Literature in Britain, 1500–1700 , p. 190, 1996,
ed. Helen Wilcox, Cambridge University Press,
ISBN   978-0521467773 , Google Books  ( https://books.googl
e.com/books?id=CVgF5yTALgAC&pg=PA190 ) .
13. "Renaissance Era Dates"  ( https://www.encyclopedia.com/liter
ature-and-arts/language-linguistics-and-literary-terms/literatur
e-general/renaissance#:~:text=Historians%20also%20argu
e%20over%20how,it%20lasted%20until%20about%201620. ) .
encyclopedia.com .
14. Monfasani, John (2016). Renaissance Humanism, from the
Middle Ages to Modern Times  ( https://books.google.com/boo
ks?id=NCKoDQAAQBAJ&pg=PP14 ) . Taylor & Francis.
ISBN   978-1351904391 .
15. Boia, Lucian (2004). Forever Young: A Cultural History of
Longevity  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=bdIBlQXSKi8
C&pg=PA63 ) . Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1861891549 .
16. Burke, P., The European Renaissance: Centre and
Peripheries  1998
17. "The Renaissance: At a Glance | Britannica"  ( https://www.brit
annica.com/topic/The-Renaissance-At-a-Glance-2235613 ) .
www.britannica.com . Retrieved 14 March  2025 .
18. Strathern, Paul The Medici: Godfathers of the Renaissance
(2003)
19. Encyclopædia Britannica , "Renaissance", 2008, O.Ed.
20. Harris, Michael H. History of Libraries in the Western World ,
Scarecrow Press Incorporate, 1999, p. 69, ISBN 0810837242
21. Norwich, John Julius, A Short History of Byzantium , 1997,
Knopf, ISBN 0679450882
22. Brotton, J., The Renaissance: A Very Short Introduction ,
OUP , 2006 ISBN 0192801635 .
23. Huizanga, Johan , The Waning of the Middle Ages  (1919,
trans. 1924)
24. Starn, Randolph (1998). "Renaissance Redux". The
American Historical Review . 103  (1): 122– 124.
doi : 10.2307/2650779  ( https://doi.org/10.2307%2F2650779 ) .
ISSN 0002-8762  ( https://search.worldcat.org/issn/0002-8762 )
. JSTOR   2650779  ( https://www.jstor.org/stable/2650779 ) .
25. Panofsky 1969:6.
26. Trinkaus, Charles; Rabil, Albert; Purnell, Frederick (1990).
"Renaissance Ideas and the Idea of the Renaissance"  ( http
s://www.jstor.org/stable/2709652 ) . Journal of the History of
Ideas . 51  (4): 667– 684. doi : 10.2307/2709652  ( https://doi.or
g/10.2307%2F2709652 ) . ISSN   0022-5037  ( https://search.wor
ldcat.org/issn/0022-5037 ) . JSTOR 2709652  ( https://www.jsto
r.org/stable/2709652 ) .
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 26 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
27. Murray, P. and Murray, L. (1963) The Art of the Renaissance .
London: Thames & Hudson  (World of Art), p. 9.
ISBN 978-0500200087 . "...in 1855 we ﬁnd, for the ﬁrst time,
the word 'Renaissance' used – by the French historian
Michelet – as an adjective to describe a whole period of
history and not conﬁned to the rebirth of Latin letters or a
classically inspired style in the arts."
28. Perry, M. Humanities in the Western Tradition  ( http://college.h
mco.com/humanities/perry/humanities/1e/students/summarie
s/ch13.html ) Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20090429
045555/http://college.hmco.com/humanities/perry/humanitie
s/1e/students/summaries/ch13.html )  29 April 2009 at the
Wayback Machine , Ch. 13
29. Kennedy, Lesley (27 September 2021). "How the
Renaissance Challenged the Church and Inﬂuenced the
Reformation"  ( https://www.history.com/articles/renaissance-in
ﬂuence-reformation-humanism ) . HISTORY . Retrieved
26 October  2025 .
30. Open University, Looking at the Renaissance: Religious
Context in the Renaissance  ( http://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/renai
ssance2/religion.htm )  (Retrieved 10 May 2007)
31. "The Open University"  ( https://fass.open.ac.uk/ ) .
fass.open.ac.uk . 12 October 2025 . Retrieved 26 October
2025 .
32. Kohn, Hans (1944). The Idea of Nationalism: A Study in Its
Origins and Background . New York: Macmillan.
33. Stark, Rodney, The Victory of Reason , Random House, NY:
2005
34. Fernandez-Armesto, Felipe (2017). The Medieval Frontiers of
Latin Christendom . United Kingdom: Taylor & Francis.
35. Leon Poliakov, The Aryan Myth: A History of Racist and
Nationalist Ideas in Europe  ( https://archive.org/details/aryan
mythhistory0000poli ) , trans. E. Howard (Basic Books, 1974),
pp. 21–22, cited in Fernandez-Armesto (2017)
36. Walker, Paul Robert, The Feud that sparked the
Renaissance: How Brunelleschi and Ghiberti Changed the
Art World  (New York, Perennial-Harper Collins, 2003)
37. Rietbergen, P. J. A. N. (2000). A Short History of the
Netherlands: From Prehistory to the Present Day  (4th ed.).
Amersfoort: Bekking. p. 59. ISBN 90-6109-440-2 .
OCLC   52849131  ( https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/52849131 ) .
38. Reynolds & Wilson 1974 , pp. 113–123
39. Reynolds & Wilson 1974 , pp. 123, 130–137
40. Truxillo, Charles A. (2008). Periods of World History: A Latin
American Perspective  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=7
1LfAfvseeYC&dq=Periods%20of%20World%20History%3
A%20A%20Latin%20American%20Perspective&pg=PP1 ) .
Jain Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-89581-863-8 .
41. Grousset, René (1970). The Empire of the Steppes: A History
of Central Asia  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=CHzGvq
RbV_IC&dq=%27%27The%20Empire%20of%20the%20Step
pes%3A%20A%20History%20of%20Central%20Asia%27%2
7%2C&pg=PP1 ) . Rutgers University Press.
ISBN 978-0-8135-1304-1 .
42. Harris, Michael H. History of Libraries in the Western World ,
Scarecrow Press, 1999, p. 145, ISBN 0810837242 .
43. Western Civilization: Ideas, Politics, and Society  ( https://book
s.google.com/books?id=kKGgoNo4un0C&pg=PA261 ) ,
Marvin Perry, Myrna Chase, Margaret C. Jacob, James R.
Jacob, 2008, pp. 261–262.
44. Reynolds & Wilson 1974 , pp. 119, 131
45. Kirshner, Julius, Family and Marriage: A socio-legal
perspective , Italy in the Age of the Renaissance: 1300–1550
( https://books.google.com/books?id=x9grA0fWpDMC&pg=PA
89 ) , ed. John M. Najemy (Oxford University Press, 2004) p.
89 (Retrieved 10 May 2007)
46. Burckhardt, Jacob, The Revival of Antiquity , The Civilization
of the Renaissance in Italy  ( http://www.boisestate.edu/course
s/hy309/docs/burckhardt/3-2.html ) Archived  ( https://web.archi
ve.org/web/20070407181825/http://www.boisestate.edu/cour
ses/hy309/docs/burckhardt/3-2.html )  7 April 2007 at the
Wayback Machine  (trans. by S.G.C. Middlemore, 1878)
47. Skinner, Quentin, The Foundations of Modern Political
Thought , vol I: The Renaissance ; vol II: The Age of
Reformation , Cambridge University Press, p. 69
48. Stark, Rodney, The Victory of Reason , New York, Random
House, 2005
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 27 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
49. Martin, J. and Romano, D., Venice Reconsidered , Baltimore,
Johns Hopkins University, 2000
50. Burckhardt, Jacob, The Republics: Venice and Florence , The
Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy  ( http://www.boisestat
e.edu/courses/hy309/docs/burckhardt/1-7.html ) Archived  ( htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20070407035616/http://www.boises
tate.edu/courses/hy309/docs/burckhardt/1-7.html )  7 April
2007 at the Wayback Machine , translated by S.G.C.
Middlemore, 1878.
51. Barbara Tuchman  (1978) A Distant Mirror , Knopf
ISBN 0394400267 .
52. The End of Europe's Middle Ages: The Black Death  ( https://w
ww.ucalgary.ca/applied_history/tutor/endmiddle/bluedot/black
death.html ) Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/201303091
62102/http://www.ucalgary.ca/applied_history/tutor/endmiddl
e/bluedot/blackdeath.html )  9 March 2013 at the Wayback
Machine  University of Calgary website. (Retrieved 5 April
2007)
53. Netzley, Patricia D. Life During the Renaissance . San Diego:
Lucent Books, Inc., 1998.
54. Hause, S. & Maltby, W. (2001). A History of European
Society. Essentials of Western Civilization  (Vol. 2, p. 217).
Belmont, CA: Thomson Learning, Inc.
55. "Renaissance And Reformation France" Mack P. Holt pp. 30,
39, 69, 166
56. Hatty, Suzanne E.; Hatty, James (1999). Disordered Body:
Epidemic Disease and Cultural Transformation  ( https://book
s.google.com/books?id=V0yJQXmGODgC&pg=PA89 ) . SUNY
Press. p. 89. ISBN 978-0791443651 .
57. Burckhardt, Jacob, The Development of the Individual , The
Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy  ( http://www.boisestat
e.edu/courses/hy309/docs/burckhardt/2-1.html ) Archived  ( htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20081003000844/http://www.boises
tate.edu/courses/hy309/docs/burckhardt/2-1.html )  3 October
2008 at the Wayback Machine , translated by S.G.C.
Middlemore, 1878.
58. Stephens, J., Individualism and the cult of creative
personality , The Italian Renaissance , New York, 1990 p. 121.
59. Guido Carocci, I dintorni di Firenze, Vol. II, Galletti e Cocci,
Firenze , 1907, pp. 336–337
60. Burke, P., "The spread of Italian humanism", in The Impact of
Humanism on Western Europe , ed. A. Goodman and A.
MacKay, London, 1990, p. 2.
61. As asserted by Gianozzo Manetti in On the Dignity and
Excellence of Man , cited in Clare, J., Italian Renaissance .
62. Pico Della Mirandola. "Oration on the Dignity of Man"  ( https://
web.archive.org/web/20110104024142/http://www.wsu.edu:8
080/~wldciv/world_civ_reader/world_civ_reader_1/pico.html ) .
Reading About the World, Volume 1 . Translated by Hooker,
Richard. Archived from the original  ( http://www.wsu.edu:808
0/~wldciv/world_civ_reader/world_civ_reader_1/pico.html )  on
4 January 2011 – via World Civilizations at Washington State
University.
63. Miller, John H. Ibn Khaldun and Machiavelli : an examination
of paradigms . OCLC 11117374  ( https://search.worldcat.org/o
clc/11117374 ) .
64. Religion and Political Development: Some Comparative
Ideas on Ibn Khaldun and Machiavelli by Barbara Freyer
Stowasser
65. Hause, S. & Maltby, W. (2001). A History of European
Society. Essentials of Western Civilization  (Vol. 2, pp. 245–
246). Belmont, CA: Thomson Learning, Inc.
66. Murray, Stuart (2009). The Library: An Illustrated History .
Skyhorse Publishing. p. 88.
67. Clare, John D. & Millen, Alan, Italian Renaissance , London,
1994, p. 14.
68. Stork, David G. Optics and Realism in Renaissance Art  ( htt
p://sirl.stanford.edu/~bob/teaching/pdf/arth202/Stork_SciAm0
4.pdf ) Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/2007061402330
8/http://sirl.stanford.edu/~bob/teaching/pdf/arth202/Stork_Sci
Am04.pdf )  14 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine  (Retrieved
10 May 2007)
69. Vasari, Giorgio, Lives of the Artists , translated by George
Bull, Penguin Classics, 1965, ISBN   0140441646 .
70. Peter Brueghel Biography  ( http://www.wga.hu/frames-e.htm
l?/bio/b/bruegel/pieter_e/biograph.html ) , Web Gallery of Art
(Retrieved 10 May 2007)
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 28 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
71. Hooker, Richard, Architecture and Public Space  ( http://www.c
artage.org.lb/en/themes/arts/Architec/RenaissanceArchitectur
e/ArchitectureandPublicSpace/ArchitectureandPublicSpace.h
tm ) Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20070522160730/
http://www.cartage.org.lb/en/themes/arts/Architec/Renaissan
ceArchitecture/ArchitectureandPublicSpace/ArchitectureandP
ublicSpace.htm )  22 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine
(Retrieved 10 May 2007)
72. Saalman, Howard (1993). Filippo Brunelleschi: The Buildings .
Zwemmer. ISBN   978-0271010670 .
73. Hause, S. & Maltby, W. (2001). A History of European
Society. Essentials of Western Civilization  (Vol. 2, pp. 250–
251). Belmont, CA: Thomson Learning, Inc.
74. Woodward, David (2007). The History of Cartography,
Volume Three: Cartography in the European Renaissance .
Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 978-0226907338 .
75. "Ferdinand Magellan"  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20240315
154103/https://library.princeton.edu/visual_materials/maps/w
ebsites/paciﬁc/magellan/magellan.html ) .
library.princeton.edu . Princeton University Library . 2010.
Archived from the original  ( https://library.princeton.edu/visual
_materials/maps/websites/paciﬁc/magellan/magellan.html )  on
15 March 2024 . Retrieved 9 May  2024 .
76. Redondo, J.M.G., & Martín, J.M.M. (2021). Making a Global
Image of the World: Science, Cosmography and Navigation
in Times of the First Circumnavigation of Earth, 1492–1522  ( h
ttps://www.torrossa.com/gs/resourceProxy?an=5141676&pub
lisher=FZ1670#page=11 ) . Spanish National Research
Council . Culture & History Digital Journal . 10(2).
ISSN 2253-797X  ( https://search.worldcat.org/issn/2253-797
X )
77. "...before Columbus discovered America in 1492 there was
no clear-cut and well-established idea of discovery; the idea
of discovery is, as will become apparent, a precondition for
the invention of science....the discovery of America disproved
a central claim about the world which had been generally
accepted before 1492...This was a crucial precondition for
the astronomical revolution which followed." Wootton, David.
The Invention of Science: A New History of the Scientiﬁc
Revolution  (Penguin, 2015) . xiv + 769 pp.
ISBN   0-06-175952-X
78. MacKinnon, Nick (1993). "The Portrait of Fra Luca Pacioli".
The Mathematical Gazette . 77  (479): 143.
doi : 10.2307/3619717  ( https://doi.org/10.2307%2F3619717 ) .
JSTOR   3619717  ( https://www.jstor.org/stable/3619717 ) .
S2CID 195006163  ( https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusI
D:195006163 ) .
79. "Printing made it possible for Brahe to survey a wide range of
publications (there were over a hundred on the comet of
1577, though many were merely astrological
prognostications) and demonstrate that the four best
observers had produced results compatible with his own. It
also ensured that Brahe's new system was quickly known
throughout Europe, so that his arguments could be tested
against the nova of 1604 and the comets of 1618. Printing
created a community of astronomers working on common
problems with common methods and reaching agreed
solutions." Wootton, David. The Invention of Science: A New
History of the Scientiﬁc Revolution  (Penguin, 2015).
pp.197-198. ISBN 0-06-175952-X
80. A History of Astronomy from Thales to Kepler, Dreyer, John
Louis Emil. Dover Publications, 1953 [1906], pp. 283-284.
New York, ISBN   978-0-486-60079-6
81. Capra, Fritjof, The Science of Leonardo; Inside the Mind of
the Great Genius of the Renaissance , New York, Doubleday,
2007.
82. "Columbus and Vesalius – The Age of Discoverers". JAMA .
2015;313(3):312. doi : 10.1001/jama.2014.11534  ( https://doi.or
g/10.1001%2Fjama.2014.11534 )
83. Allen Debus , Man and Nature in the Renaissance
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978).
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 29 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
84. Brotton, J., "Science and Philosophy", The Renaissance: A
Very Short Introduction , Oxford University Press , 2006
ISBN 0192801635 .
85. Catholic Encyclopedia , Western Schism  ( http://www.newadve
nt.org/cathen/13539a.htm )  (Retrieved 10 May 2007)
86. Catholic Encyclopedia , Alexander VI  ( http://www.newadven
t.org/cathen/01289a.htm )  (Retrieved 10 May 2007)
87. Mommsen, Theodore E.  (1942). "Petrarch's Conception of
the 'Dark Ages' ". Speculum . 17  (2): 226– 242.
doi : 10.2307/2856364  ( https://doi.org/10.2307%2F2856364 ) .
JSTOR 2856364  ( https://www.jstor.org/stable/2856364 ) .
S2CID   161360211  ( https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusI
D:161360211 ) .
88. Leonardo Bruni, James Hankins, History of the Florentine
people , Volume 1, Books 1–4 (2001), p. xvii.
89. Albrow, Martin, The Global Age: state and society beyond
modernity  (1997), Stanford University Press, p. 205  ( https://b
ooks.google.com/books?id=ZwmdxMMjOd4C&pg=PA205 )
ISBN 0804728704 .
90. Panofsky, Erwin . Renaissance and Renascences in Western
Art , New York: Harper and Row, 1960.
91. The Open University Guide to the Renaissance, Deﬁning the
Renaissance  ( http://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/renaissance/deﬁnin
g.htm ) Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/200907210704
45/http://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/renaissance/deﬁning.htm )  21
July 2009 at the Wayback Machine  (Retrieved 10 May 2007)
92. Sohm, Philip. Style in the Art Theory of Early Modern Italy
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001)
ISBN 0521780691 .
93. Foundation, Poetry (16 January 2024). "The English
Renaissance"  ( https://www.poetryfoundation.org/collections/1
54826/an-introduction-to-the-english-renaissance ) . Poetry
Foundation . Retrieved 17 January  2024 .
94. Best, Michael. "Art in England: Life and Times - Internet
Shakespeare Editions"  ( https://internetshakespeare.uvic.ca/Li
brary/SLT/literature/art/england.html ) .
internetshakespeare.uvic.ca . Retrieved 18 January  2024 .
95. "Art in Renaissance England"  ( https://www.oxfordbibliographi
es.com/display/document/obo-9780195399301/obo-9780195
399301-0512.xml ) . obo . Retrieved 18 January  2024 .
96. "A Brief History of Architecture in Britain"  ( https://cdn.southa
mpton.ac.uk/assets/imported/transforms/content-block/Useful
Downloads_Download/1358E11C695C4670BC764FA5CAB2
EEFE/Architecture%20of%20London%20Preparatory%20Ma
terials.pdf ) (PDF) . University of Southampton .
97. "The Scientiﬁc Revolution"  ( https://www.historic-uk.com/Histo
ryUK/HistoryofBritain/The-Scientiﬁc-Revolution/ ) . Historic UK .
Retrieved 17 January  2024 .
98. Klein, Jürgen (2012), "Francis Bacon"  ( https://plato.stanford.e
du/archives/win2016/entries/francis-bacon/ ) , in Zalta, Edward
N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy  (Winter
2016 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20191022212025/http
s://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2016/entries/francis-baco
n/ )  from the original on 22 October 2019 , retrieved
17 January  2020
99. Michelet, Jules. History of France , trans. G.H. Smith (New
York: D. Appleton, 1847)
100. Vincent Cronin (2011). The Florentine Renaissance  ( https://b
ooks.google.com/books?id=aU8z-Sge6WgC ) . Random
House. ISBN 978-1446466544 .
101. Strauss, Gerald (1965). "The Religious Renaissance of the
German Humanists". English Historical Review . 80  (314):
156– 157. doi : 10.1093/ehr/LXXX.CCCXIV.156  ( https://doi.or
g/10.1093%2Fehr%2FLXXX.CCCXIV.156 ) . JSTOR 560776
( https://www.jstor.org/stable/560776 ) .
102. Louis A. Waldman; Péter Farbaky; Louis Alexander Waldman
(2011). Italy & Hungary: Humanism and Art in the Early
Renaissance  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=l-OKuQAA
CAAJ ) . Villa I Tatti. ISBN   978-0674063464 .
103. Hungary  (4th ed.) Authors: Zoltán Halász / András Balla
(photo) / Zsuzsa Béres (translation) Published by Corvina, in
1998 ISBN 9631341291 , 9631347273
104. "the inﬂuences of the ﬂorentine renaissance in hungary"  ( http
s://web.archive.org/web/20090321190654/http://www.fondazi
one-delbianco.org/inglese/relaz00_01/mester.htm ) .
Fondazione-delbianco.org. Archived from the original  ( http://
www.fondazione-delbianco.org/inglese/relaz00_01/mester.ht
m )  on 21 March 2009 . Retrieved 31 July  2009 .
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 30 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
105. History section: Miklós Horler: Budapest műemlékei I, Bp:
1955, pp. 259–307
106. Post-war reconstruction: László Gerő: A helyreállított budai
vár, Bp, 1980, pp. 11–60.
107. Czigány, Lóránt, A History of Hungarian Literature , " The
Renaissance in Hungary  ( http://mek.oszk.hu/02000/02042/ht
ml/5.html ) " (Retrieved 10 May 2007)
108. Marcus Tanner, The Raven King: Matthias Corvinus and the
Fate of his Lost Library (New Haven: Yale U.P., 2008)
109. Documentary heritage concerning Hungary and
recommended for inclusion in the Memory of the World
International Register  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20051105
150132/http://portal.unesco.org/ci/en/ev.php-URL_ID%3D159
76%26URL_DO%3DDO_TOPIC%26URL_SECTION%3D20
1.html ) . portal.unesco.org
110. E. Kovács 1990 , pp. 177, 180–181.
111. Engel 2001 , p. 319.
112. E. Kovács 1990 , pp. 180–181.
113. Kubinyi 2008 , pp. 171–172.
114. Kubinyi 2008 , p. 172.
115. E. Kovács 1990 , p. 181.
116. Klaniczay 1992 , p. 168.
117. Kubinyi 2008 , p. 183.
118. Franz-Joachim Verspohl , Michelangelo Buonarroti und
Leonardo Da Vinci: Republikanischer Alltag und
Künstlerkonkurrenz in Florenz zwischen 1501 und 1505
(Wallstein Verlag, 2007), p. 151.
119. Klaniczay 1992 , p. 166.
120. Cartledge 2011 , p. 67.
121. E. Kovács 1990 , p. 185.
122. Klaniczay 1992 , p. 167.
123. Engel 2001 , p. 321.
124. Hendrix 2013 , p. 59.
125. Hendrix 2013 , pp. 63, 65.
126. Tanner 2009 , p. 99.
127. Heughebaert, H.; Defoort, A.; Van Der Donck, R. (1998).
Artistieke opvoeding . Wommelgem, Belgium: Den Gulden
Engel bvba. ISBN 978-9050352222 .
128. Janson, H.W.; Janson, Anthony F. (1997). History of Art  ( htt
p://www.abramsbooks.com )  (5th, rev. ed.). New York: Harry
N. Abrams, Inc. ISBN   978-0810934429 .
129. Láng, Paul Henry (1939). "The So Called Netherlands
Schools". The Musical Quarterly . 25  (1): 48– 59. doi : 10.1093/
mq/xxv.1.48  ( https://doi.org/10.1093%2Fmq%2Fxxv.1.48 ) .
JSTOR   738699  ( https://www.jstor.org/stable/738699 ) .
130. "Renæssance i Europa og Danmark"  ( https://natmus.dk/histo
risk-viden/danmark/renaessance-1536-1660/renaessance-i-e
uropa-og-danmark/ ) . Nationalmuseet  (in Danish) . Retrieved
24 November  2023 .
131. Wootton, David (2015). The Invention of Science: A New
History of the Scientiﬁc Revolution  (First U.S. ed.). New York,
NY: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-175952-9 .
OCLC   883146361  ( https://search.worldcat.org/oclc/88314636
1 ) .
132. "Tycho Brahe, 1546-1601"  ( https://danmarkshistorien.dk/vis/
materiale/tycho-brahe-1546-1601 ) . danmarkshistorien.dk  (in
Danish) . Retrieved 24 November  2023 .
133. Painting in Oil in the Low Countries and Its Spread to
Southern Europe  ( http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/optg/h
d_optg.htm ) , Metropolitan Museum of Art  website. (Retrieved
5 April 2007)
134. Celenza, Christopher (2004), The Lost Italian Renaissance:
Humanists, Historians, and Latin's Legacy . Baltimore, Johns
Hopkins University Press
135. Rundle, David (2012). Humanism in ﬁfteenth-century Europe .
Oxford: The Society for the Study of Medieval Languages
and Literature. p. 143. ISBN 9780907570400 .
136. Suchodolski, Bogdan (1973). Poland, the Land of
Copernicus . Wrocław: Ossolineum, Polska Akademia Nauk
PAN. p. 150. OCLC 714705  ( https://search.worldcat.org/ocl
c/714705 ) .
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 31 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
137. Bona Sforza (1494–1557)  ( http://en.poland.gov.pl/Bona,Sforz
a,%281494,%E2%80%93,1557%29,1958.html ) Archived  ( htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20140506203103/http://en.poland.g
ov.pl/Bona,Sforza,(1494,%E2%80%93,1557),1958.html )  6
May 2014 at the Wayback Machine . poland.gov.pl (Retrieved
4 April 2007)
138. For example, the re-establishment of Jagiellonian University
in 1364. Waltos, Stanisław (31 October 2002). "The Past and
the Present"  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20021120144715/h
ttp://www.uj.edu.pl/dispatch.jsp?item=uniwersytet%2Fhistori
a%2Fhistoriatxt.jsp&lang=en ) . Uniwersytet Jagielloński .
Archived from the original  ( http://www.uj.edu.pl/dispatch.jsp?it
em=uniwersytet/historia/historiatxt.jsp&lang=en#narodziny )
on 20 November 2002.
139. "HISTORIA ARCHITEKTURY EUROPEJSKIEJ TYLKO DLA
ORŁÓW - SKRÓT"  ( https://www.historiasztuki.com.pl/stron
y/002-00-14-STYLE-RENESANS.html ) .
www.historiasztuki.com.pl .
140. Koyama, Satoshi (2007). "Chapter 8: The Polish–Lithuanian
Commonwealth as a Political Space: Its Unity and
Complexity"  ( http://src-h.slav.hokudai.ac.jp/coe21/publish/no1
5_ses/08_koyama.pdf ) (PDF) . In Hayashi, Tadayuki; Fukuda,
Hiroshi (eds.). Regions in Central and Eastern Europe: Past
and Present  ( http://src-h.slav.hokudai.ac.jp/coe21/publish/no
15_ses/contents.html ) . Slavic Research Center, Hokkaido
University. pp.  137– 153. ISBN   978-4-938637-43-9 . Archived
( https://web.archive.org/web/20200225015447/http://src-h.sla
v.hokudai.ac.jp/coe21/publish/no15_ses/contents.html )  from
the original on 25 February 2020 . Retrieved 23 May  2019 .
141. Phillip Hewett, Racovia: An Early Liberal Religious
Community , Providence, Blackstone Editions, 2004, p.20-21.
142. Norman Davies, God's Playground: A History of Poland in
Two Volumes, Oxford University Press, 2005,
ISBN   0-19-925339-0 , p.262
143. "Portuguese Overseas Travels and European Readers"  ( http
s://web.archive.org/web/20111112175553/http://www.brown.e
du/Facilities/John_Carter_Brown_Library/Portugal/Oversea
s.html ) . Portugal and Renaissance Europe . The John Carter
Brown Library Exhibitions, Brown University. Archived from
the original  ( https://www.brown.edu/Facilities/John_Carter_Br
own_Library/Portugal/Overseas.html )  on 12 November 2011 .
Retrieved 19 July  2011 .
144. Bergin, Thomas G. ; Speake, Jennifer , eds. (2004).
Encyclopedia of the Renaissance and the Reformation  ( http
s://books.google.com/books?id=VOb4hIp7EE8C&pg=PP1 ) .
Infobase Publishing. ISBN   978-0816054510 .
145. Bergin, Thomas G.; Speake, Jennifer (2004). Encyclopedia of
the Renaissance and the Reformation  ( https://books.google.c
om/books?id=VOb4hIp7EE8C&pg=PP490 ) . Infobase
Publishing. p. 490. ISBN   978-0816054510 .
146. Bietenholz, Peter G.; Deutscher, Thomas Brian (2003).
Contemporaries of Erasmus: a biographical register of the
Renaissance and Reformation, Volumes 1–3  ( https://books.g
oogle.com/books?id=hruQ386SfFcC&pg=RA1-PA22 ) .
University of Toronto Press. p. 22. ISBN 978-0802085771 .
147. Lach, Donald Frederick (1994). Asia in the making of Europe:
A century of wonder. The literary arts. The scholarly
disciplines  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=hhE3sPY78s
0C&pg=PA6 ) . University of Chicago Press.
ISBN   978-0226467337 . Retrieved 15 July  2011 .
148. "Deﬁning the Renaissance, Open University"  ( https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20081218135235/http://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/re
naissance2/deﬁning.htm ) . Open.ac.uk. Archived from the
original  ( http://www.open.ac.uk/Arts/renaissance2/deﬁning.ht
m )  on 18 December 2008 . Retrieved 31 July  2009 .
149. Burckhardt, Jacob. The Civilization of the Renaissance in
Italy  ( http://www.boisestate.edu/courses/hy309/docs/burckhar
dt/burckhardt.html ) Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/200
80921145058/http://www.boisestate.edu/courses/hy309/docs/
burckhardt/burckhardt.html )  21 September 2008 at the
Wayback Machine  (trans. S.G.C. Middlemore, London, 1878)
150. Gay, Peter, Style in History , New York: Basic Books, 1974.
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 32 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
151. Burckhardt, Jacob . "The Civilization of the Renaissance in
Italy"  ( https://web.archive.org/web/20081003000844/http://ww
w.boisestate.edu/courses/hy309/docs/burckhardt/2-1.html ) .
Archived from the original  ( http://www.boisestate.edu/course
s/hy309/docs/burckhardt/2-1.html )  on October 3, 2008 .
Retrieved August 31,  2008 .
152. Girolamo Savonarola 's popularity is a prime example of the
manifestation of such concerns. Other examples include
Philip II of Spain 's censorship of Florentine paintings, noted
by Edward L. Goldberg, "Spanish Values and Tuscan
Painting", Renaissance Quarterly  (1998) p. 914
153. Renaissance Forum  ( http://www.hull.ac.uk/renforum/v2no2/si
ar.htm ) Archived  ( https://web.archive.org/web/201206140128
23/http://www.hull.ac.uk/renforum/v2no2/siar.htm )  14 June
2012 at the Wayback Machine  at Hull University , Autumn
1997 (Retrieved 10 May 2007)
154. Lopez, Robert S. & Miskimin, Harry A. (1962). "The
Economic Depression of the Renaissance". Economic History
Review . 14  (3): 408– 426. doi : 10.1111/
j.1468-0289.1962.tb00059.x  ( https://doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.146
8-0289.1962.tb00059.x ) . JSTOR 2591885  ( https://www.jsto
r.org/stable/2591885 ) .
155. Thorndike, Lynn ; Johnson, F.R.; Kristeller, P. O.; Lockwood,
D.P.; Thorndike, L. (1943). "Some Remarks on the Question
of the Originality of the Renaissance". Journal of the History
of Ideas . 4  (1): 49– 74. doi : 10.2307/2707236  ( https://doi.org/1
0.2307%2F2707236 ) . JSTOR 2707236  ( https://www.jstor.org/
stable/2707236 ) .
156. Kelly-Gadol, Joan. "Did Women Have a Renaissance?"
Becoming Visible: Women in European History . Edited by
Renate Bridenthal and Claudia Koonz. Boston: Houghton
Mifﬂin, 1977.
157. Stephen Greenblatt Renaissance Self-Fashioning: From
More to Shakespeare , University of Chicago Press , 1980.
158. Osborne, Roger (2006). Civilization: a new history of the
Western world  ( https://archive.org/details/00book209569880
3 ) . Pegasus Books. pp.  180  ( https://archive.org/details/00boo
k2095698803/page/180 ) –. ISBN   978-1933648194 . Retrieved
10 December  2011 .
159. Panofsky, Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art
1969:38; Panofsky's chapter "'Renaissance – self-deﬁnition
or self-deception?" succinctly introduces the historiographical
debate, with copious footnotes to the literature.
160. Haskins, Charles Homer, The Renaissance of the Twelfth
Century , Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1927
ISBN   0674760751 .
161. Hubert, Jean, L'Empire carolingien  (English: The Carolingian
Renaissance , translated by James Emmons, New York: G.
Braziller, 1970).
▪ Burckhardt, Jacob , The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy  (1860), a famous classic; excerpt and text search 2007 edition  ( htt
ps://www.amazon.com/dp/1426400934 ) ; also complete text online  ( https://books.google.com/books?id=kLkNAAAAIAAJ&pg=PA
1 ) .
▪ Cartledge, Bryan  (2011). The Will to Survive: A History of Hungary . C. Hurst & Co. ISBN   978-1849041126 .
▪ E. Kovács, Péter (1990). Matthias Corvinus  (in Hungarian). Ofﬁcina Nova. ISBN   9637835490 .
▪ Engel, Pál (2001). The Realm of St Stephen: A History of Medieval Hungary, 895–1526 . I.B. Tauris Publishers.
ISBN   1860640613 .
General sources
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 33 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
▪ Hendrix, Scott E. (2013). "Astrological forecasting and the Turkish menace in the Renaissance Balkans"  ( https://web.archive.org/
web/20220704092501/http://www.anthroserbia.org/Content/PDF/Articles/9fedd563ae93475ebb3cb94cd9bdf75e.pdf ) (PDF) .
Anthropology . 13  (2). Universitatis Miskolciensis: 57– 72. ISSN   1452-7243  ( https://search.worldcat.org/issn/1452-7243 ) . Archived
from the original  ( http://www.anthroserbia.org/Content/PDF/Articles/9fedd563ae93475ebb3cb94cd9bdf75e.pdf ) (PDF)  on 4 July
2022 . Retrieved 18 March  2020 .
▪ Klaniczay, Tibor (1992). "The age of Matthias Corvinus"  ( https://archive.org/details/renaissanceinnat0000unse/page/164 ) . In
Porter, Roy; Teich, Mikuláš (eds.). The Renaissance in National Context . Cambridge University Press. pp.  164–179  ( https://archiv
e.org/details/renaissanceinnat0000unse/page/164 ) . ISBN   0521369703 .
▪ Kubinyi, András (2008). Matthias Rex . Balassi Kiadó. ISBN   978-9635067671 .
▪ Reynolds, L. D.; Wilson, Nigel (1974). Scribes and Scholars: A Guide to the Transmission of Greek and Latin Literature . Oxford:
Clarendon Press. ISBN   978-0199686339 . OL   26919731M  ( https://openlibrary.org/books/OL26919731M ) .
▪ Tanner, Marcus (2009). The Raven King: Matthias Corvinus and the Fate of his Lost Library . Yale University Press.
ISBN   978-0300158281 .
▪ Cronin, Vincent  (1969), The Flowering of the Renaissance , ISBN   0712698841
▪ Cronin, Vincent (1992), The Renaissance , ISBN   0002154110
▪ Campbell, Gordon. The Oxford Dictionary of the Renaissance . (2003). 862 pp. online at OUP
▪ Davis, Robert C. and Beth Lindsmith. Renaissance People: Lives that Shaped the Modern Age . (2011). ISBN   978-1606060780
▪ Ergang, Robert (1967), The Renaissance , ISBN   0442023197
▪ Ferguson, Wallace K. (1962), [ Europe in Transition, 1300–1500 ], ISBN   0049400088
▪ Fisher, Celia. Flowers of the Renaissance . (2011). ISBN   978-1606060629
▪ Fletcher, Stella. The Longman Companion to Renaissance Europe, 1390–1530 . (2000). 347 pp.
▪ Grendler, Paul F., ed. The Renaissance: An Encyclopedia for Students . (2003). 970 pp.
▪ Hale, John. The Civilization of Europe in the Renaissance . (1994). 648 pp.; a magistral survey, heavily illustrated; excerpt and
text search  ( https://www.amazon.com/dp/0684803526 )
▪ Hall, Bert S. Weapons and Warfare in Renaissance Europe: Gunpowder, Technology, and Tactics  (2001); excerpt and text search
( https://www.amazon.com/dp/0801869943 )
▪ Hattaway, Michael, ed. A Companion to English Renaissance Literature and Culture . (2000). 747 pp.
▪ Jensen, De Lamar (1992), Renaissance Europe , ISBN   0395889472
▪ Johnson, Paul. The Renaissance: A Short History . (2000). 197 pp. excerpt and text search  ( https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0002N
KDU2 ) ; also online free  ( https://archive.org/details/renaissance00paul )
Further reading
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 34 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
▪ Keene, Bryan C. Gardens of the Renaissance . (2013). ISBN   978-1606061435
▪ King, Margaret L. Women of the Renaissance  (1991) excerpt and text search  ( https://www.amazon.com/dp/0226436187 )
▪ Kristeller, Paul Oskar, and Michael Mooney. Renaissance Thought and its Sources  (1979); excerpt and text search  ( https://www.a
mazon.com/dp/0231045131 )
▪ Nauert, Charles G. Historical Dictionary of the Renaissance . (2004). 541 pp.
▪ Patrick, James A., ed. Renaissance and Reformation  (5 vol 2007), 1584 pages; comprehensive encyclopedia
▪ Plumb, J.H. The Italian Renaissance  (2001); excerpt and text search  ( https://www.amazon.com/dp/0618127380 )
▪ Paoletti, John T. and Gary M. Radke. Art in Renaissance Italy  (4th ed. 2011)
▪ Potter, G.R. ed. The New Cambridge Modern History: Volume 1: The Renaissance, 1493–1520  (1957) online  ( https://www.cambr
idge.org/core/books/the-new-cambridge-modern-history/1F3A455FF6D62052CBCFF0DBFD109803 ) ; major essays by multiple
scholars. Summarizes the viewpoint of the 1950s.
▪ Robin, Diana; Larsen, Anne R.; and Levin, Carole, eds. Encyclopedia of Women in the Renaissance: Italy, France, and England
(2007) 459 pp.
▪ Rowse, A.L. The Elizabethan Renaissance: The Life of the Society  (2000); excerpt and text search  ( https://www.amazon.com/d
p/156663315X )
▪ Ruggiero, Guido. The Renaissance in Italy: A Social and Cultural History of the Rinascimento  (Cambridge University Press,
2015). 648 pp. online review  ( https://www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php?id=43204 )
▪ Rundle, David, ed. The Hutchinson Encyclopedia of the Renaissance . (1999). 434 pp.; numerous brief articles online edition  ( http
s://www.questia.com/read/95888138?title=The%20Hutchinson%20Encyclopedia%20of%20the%20Renaissance )
▪ Turner, Richard N. Renaissance Florence  (2005); excerpt and text search  ( https://www.amazon.com/dp/0131344013/ )
▪ Ward, A. The Cambridge Modern History . Vol 1: The Renaissance (1902)  ( http://www.uni-mannheim.de/mateo/camenaref/cmh/c
mh.html ) ; older essays by scholars; emphasis on politics
▪ Bouwsma, William J. "The Renaissance and the drama of Western history." American Historical Review  (1979): 1–15. in JSTOR
( https://www.jstor.org/stable/1855657 )
▪ Caferro, William. Contesting the Renaissance  (2010); excerpt and text search  ( https://www.amazon.com/Contesting-Renaissanc
e-William-Caferro/dp/1405123702/ )
▪ Ferguson, Wallace K. "The Interpretation of the Renaissance: Suggestions for a Synthesis." Journal of the History of Ideas
(1951): 483–495. online in JSTOR
▪ Ferguson, Wallace K. "Recent trends in the economic historiography of the Renaissance." Studies in the Renaissance  (1960): 7–
26.
▪ Ferguson, Wallace Klippert. The Renaissance in historical thought  (AMS Press, 1981)
Historiography
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 35 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
▪ Grendler, Paul F. "The Future of Sixteenth Century Studies: Renaissance and Reformation Scholarship in the Next Forty Years",
Sixteenth Century Journal  Spring 2009, Vol. 40 Issue 1, pp. 182+
▪ Murray, Stuart A.P. The Library: An Illustrated History. American Library Association, Chicago, 2012.
▪ Ruggiero, Guido, ed. A Companion to the Worlds of the Renaissance . (2002). 561 pp.
▪ Starn, Randolph. "A Postmodern Renaissance?" Renaissance Quarterly  2007 60(1): 1–24 in Project MUSE  ( http://muse.jhu.edu/j
ournals/ren/summary/v060/60.1starn.html )
▪ Summit, Jennifer. "Renaissance Humanism and the Future of the Humanities". Literature Compass  (2012) 9#10 pp: 665–678.
▪ Trivellato, Francesca. "Renaissance Italy and the Muslim Mediterranean in Recent Historical Work", Journal of Modern History
(March 2010), 82#1 pp: 127–155.
▪ Woolfson, Jonathan, ed. Palgrave advances in Renaissance historiography  (Palgrave Macmillan, 2005)
▪ Bartlett, Kenneth, ed. The Civilization of the Italian Renaissance: A Sourcebook  (2nd ed., 2011)
▪ Ross, James Bruce, and Mary M. McLaughlin, eds. The Portable Renaissance Reader  (1977); excerpt and text search  ( https://w
ww.amazon.com/dp/0140150617 )
▪ "The Renaissance"  ( https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00546tq )  episode of In Our Time , a BBC Radio 4  discussion with
Francis Ames-Lewis, Peter Burke and Evelyn Welch (8 June 2000).
▪ Symonds, John Addington (1911). "Renaissance, The"   ( https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/1911_Encyclop%C3%A6dia_Britannica/Re
naissance,_The ) . Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 23 (11th ed.). pp.  83– 93.
▪ Renaissance Philosophy  ( https://iep.utm.edu/renaissa/ )  entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
▪ Ofﬁcial website  ( http://www.rensoc.org.uk/ )  of the Society for Renaissance Studies
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Renaissance&oldid=1340469952 "
Primary sources
External links
Renaissance - Wikipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance
Стр. 36 из 36 27.02.2026, 16:08
